[DISEASE: Acne]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/acne]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Acne — extra information
Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2014.
Previous contributor:
Minor amendment by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, 2024.
Edited by the DermNet content department
Acne is a common chronic disorder affecting the hair follicle and sebaceous gland, in which there is expansion and blockage of the follicle and inflammation. There are several variants.
Acne affects males and females of all races and ethnicities. It is prevalent in adolescents and young adults, with 85% of 16 to 18 year-olds affected. However, it may sometimes occur in children and adults of all ages.
Acne is due to a combination of factors. The exact mechanisms are not fully understood.
Endogenous and exogenous androgenic hormones
Innate immune activation with inflammatory mediators
Distension and occlusion of the hair follicles
Flares of acne can be provoked by:
Polycystic ovarian disease
Drugs: steroids, hormones, anticonvulsants, epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors and others
Application of occlusive cosmetics
High environmental humidity
Diet high in dairy products and high glycaemic foods.
What are the clinical features of acne?
Acne is often confined to the face but it may involve the neck, chest, and back.
It is characterised by:
Open and closed uninflamed comedones (blackheads and whiteheads)
Inflamed papules and pustules
In severe acne, nodules and pseudocysts
Post-inflammatory erythematous or pigmented macules and scars
Adverse social and psychological effects.
Severity is classified as mild, moderate, or severe.
Mild acne: total lesion count <30
Moderate acne: total lesion count 30–125
Severe acne: total lesion count >125
What tests are necessary for acne?
Skin swabs for microscopy and culture
Hormonal tests in females.
Comedonal acne Acne vulgaris Nodulocystic acne
What is the treatment for acne?
Topical anti-acne agents, such as benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid, and tretinoin or adapalene gel and some antibiotics (clindamycin). New bioactive proteins may also prove successful.
Newer topical agents such as clascoterone
Low-dose combined oral contraceptive
Antiseptic or keratolytic washes containing salicylic acid
As for mild acne plus a tetracycline such as doxycycline 50–200 mg daily for 6 months or so
Erythromycin or trimethoprim if doxycycline intolerant
Antiandrogen therapy with long-term cyproterone acetate + ethinylestradiol or spironolactone may be considered in women not responding to low-dose combined oral contraceptive, particularly for women with polycystic ovaries
Isotretinoin is often used if acne is persistent or treatment-resistant
Intralesional steroid injections can be useful for acute larger acne lesions
Referral to a dermatologist
If fever, arthralgia, bone pain, ulcerated or extensive skin lesions, blood count should be arranged and referral is urgent
Oral antibiotics are often used in higher doses than normal
Oral isotretinoin is usually recommended in suitable patients
What is the outlook for acne?
Acne tends to improve after the age of 25 years but may persist, especially in females.
Treatment with isotretinoin can lead to long-term remission in many patients.
Reynolds RV, Yeung H, Cheng CE, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2024;90(5):1006.e1-1006.e30. PubMed
Acne, Rosacea, and Perioral Dermatitis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Acne — emedicinehealth
Clinical Guidelines — British Association of Dermatologists
Acne: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Patient information: A guide to acne — UpToDate for patients
Acne — American Academy of Dermatology
Systematic reviews on acne vulgaris — University of Nottingham
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/psoriasis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Psoriasis — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
L40, L40.0, L40.4, L40.8, L62
EA90.Z, EA90.Y, EA90.0, EA90.1, EA90.2, EA90.3, EA90.50, EA90.51, EA90.52
9014002, 238608008, 200965009, 238600001, 238604005, 37042000, 402335001, 200975007, 238601002, 402308005, 402307000, 402310007, 238609000, 402325007, 402312004, 402318000, 200970002, 200971003, 25847004, 200977004
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Last reviewed: June 2023
Author(s): Dr Chelsea Jones, Newcastle, Australia; Dr Monisha Gupta, Dermatologist, Australia (2020); updated by Dr Salim Uddin, Medical Registrar, New Zealand; A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand (2023). Minor update March 2026.
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin condition characterised by clearly defined, red and scaly plaques. It is classified into several types.
What causes psoriasis?
Psoriasis is multifactorial. It is classified as an immune-mediated genetic skin disease.
This involves a complex interaction between the innate and adaptive immune systems.
Genome-wide association studies report that the histocompatibility complex HLA-C*06:02 (previously known as HLA-Cw6) is associated with early-onset psoriasis and guttate psoriasis. This major histocompatibility complex is not associated with psoriatic arthritis, nail psoriasis, or late-onset psoriasis.
Immune factors and inflammatory cytokines (messenger proteins) such as IL1β and TNFα, IL-23, and IL-17 are responsible for the clinical features of psoriasis. These have therefore become targets for biological drugs and have led to success in drug management.
What are the clinical features of psoriasis?
Psoriasis usually presents with symmetrically distributed, red, scaly plaques with well-defined edges. The scale is typically silvery white, except in skin folds where the plaques often appear shiny with a moist peeling surface. The most common sites are the scalp, elbows, and knees, but any part of the skin can be involved. The plaques are usually very persistent without treatment.
Itch is mostly mild but may be severe in some patients, leading to scratching and lichenification characterised by thickened leathery skin and increased skin markings. Painful skin cracks or fissures may occur, particularly on the palms and soles.
Psoriasis can demonstrate the Koebner phenomenon. This involves the generation of new lesions on the skin that has been damaged or irritated such as by injury, burns etc.
When psoriatic plaques clear up, they may leave brown or pale marks (postinflammatory hypo- or hyperpigmentation) that can be expected to fade over several months.
Auspitz sign refers to pinpoint bleeding upon removal of the scaly layer in plaque psoriasis. It is related to the dilated dermal capillaries involved in the histological pathogenesis of chronic psoriasis.
How is psoriasis classified?
Certain features of psoriasis can be categorised to help determine appropriate investigations and treatment pathways - overlap may occur. These include:
Early age of onset <35 years (75%) vs late age of onset >50 years
Acute eg guttate psoriasis vs chronic plaque psoriasis
Localised eg, scalp, palmoplantar psoriasis vs generalised psoriasis
Small plaques (<3 cm) vs large plaques (>3 cm)
Thin plaques vs thick plaques
Nail involvement vs no nail involvement
Post-streptococcal acute guttate psoriasis
Widespread small plaques
Often resolves after several months
Small plaques of psoriasis appear almost like rain drops splashed over the skin Close up of guttate psoriasis Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation as guttate psoriasis is resolving
Small plaque psoriasis
Often late age of onset
Chronic plaque psoriasis
Persistent and treatment-resistant
Most often affects elbows, knees, and lower back
Ranges from mild to very extensive
Well demarcated plaques with silvery scale in chronic plaque psoriasis Thick silvery scale over the elbow Close up of well demarcated plaques with silvery scale in chronic plaque psoriasis
Unstable plaque psoriasis
The rapid extension of existing or new plaques
Koebner phenomenon: new plaques at sites of skin injury
Induced by infection, stress, drugs, or drug withdrawal
Flexural psoriasis (inverse psoriasis)
Affects body folds and genitals
Smooth, well-defined patches
Colonised by candida yeasts
Well demarcated salmon pink erythema which extends to the apex of the skin fold due to flexural psoriasis Well demarcated salmon pink erythema which extends to the apex of the skin fold and into the natal cleft due to flexural psoriasis Axillary psoriasis
Often the first or only site of psoriasis
Well demarcated plaques of scalp psoriasis Scalp psoriasis often extends beyond the hair line Adherent scale in scalp psoriasis
Overlap of seborrhoeic dermatitis and psoriasis
Affects the scalp, face, ears and chest
Colonised by malassezia
Sebopsoriasis of ear Sebopsoriasis of chest Sebopsoriasis affecting the retroauricular skin
Palmoplantar psoriasis
Affecting the palms and/or soles
Hyperkeratosis of the soles and heels due to psoriasis - painful fissuring is often a problem Palmar plaque psoriasis Hyperkeratosis of the soles and heels due to psoriasis
Pitting, onycholysis, yellowing, and ridging
Associated with inflammatory arthritis
Irregular pits and onycholysis of a finger nail - note the yellow band proximal to the onycholysis Onycholysis, proximal yellow band and nail plate splitting due to nail unit psoriasis Onycholiasis (separation of the plate from the bed) due to psoriasis
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Erythrodermic psoriasis is rare.
May or may not be preceded by another form of psoriasis
Acute and chronic forms
May result in systemic illness with temperature dysregulation, electrolyte imbalance, or cardiac failure
Confluent skin redness and scaling - the patient was shivery and feels unwell Confluent redness affecting more than 80% of the body – erythrodermic psoriasis Close up of the confluent redness and scale in erythrodermic psoriasis
There is some controversy as to whether generalised pustulosis and localised palmoplantar pustulosis are classified as being within the psoriasis spectrum.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Plaque psoriasis is the most common type of psoriasis in all racial groups. Non-Caucasians tend to have more extensive skin involvement than Caucasians. Asian populations are reported to have the highest percentage of body surface area involvement.
In skin of colour, the plaques are typically thicker with a more pronounced silver scale and itch. The pinkness of early patches may be more difficult to appreciate.
Thick plaques may appear violet or dark in colour. Plaque psoriasis is more likely to result in postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation in the skin of colour, which further impacts the quality of life even after disease clearance.
Other types of psoriasis show variable rates in different skin types. Palmoplantar psoriasis is reported to be more common in the Indian population. Non-Caucasians are more likely to present with pustular and erythrodermic psoriasis than Caucasians, whereas flexural psoriasis is said to occur at a lower rate in skin of colour.
Chronic plaque psoriasis in skin of colour Chronic plaque psoriasis in skin of colour Small plaque psoriasis with prominent scale in skin of colour
Factors that aggravate psoriasis
Streptococcal tonsillitis ('Strep throat') and other infections
Injuries such as cuts, abrasions, or sunburn (koebnerised psoriasis)
Sun exposure in ~10% of psoriasis patients (sun exposure is more often beneficial)
Obesity, smoking, or excessive alcohol
Medications such as lithium, beta-blockers, antimalarials, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, terbinafine, immunotherapy, and others
Stopping oral steroids or strong topical corticosteroids, often referred to as steroid withdrawal rebound
Other environmental factors such as a stressful event.
Health conditions associated with psoriasis
Patients with psoriasis are more likely than others to have associated health conditions such as those that are listed here.
Inflammatory “psoriatic arthritis” (an autoimmune disease) and spondyloarthropathy (seen in up to 40% of patients with early-onset chronic plaque psoriasis).
Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis).
Uveitis (a form of inflammation of the eye).
Localised palmoplantar pustulosis, generalised pustulosis, and acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (see Liver problems and psoriasis).
There may be an overall increased cancer risk in those with moderate to severe psoriasis. Cancers of the mouth, pharynx (throat), oesophagus, liver, pancreas, kidney and bladder were more likely in people with psoriasis.
Psoriasis and metabolic syndrome
Metabolic syndrome refers to the combination of obesity, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and insulin resistance.
It is present in many patients with psoriasis, especially those with severe chronic plaque psoriasis.
The link between psoriasis, obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus is independent of age, sex, and smoking history.
The link is thought to be due to genetic factors and the presence of chronic inflammation.
The interleukin (IL)-23/Th 17 axis drives both psoriatic skin inflammation and atherosclerosis; psoriasis is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
Lifestyle modifications such as weight loss, lipid profile reduction, and tight control of glucose levels reduce the mortality from cardiovascular events in patients with psoriasis.
How is psoriasis diagnosed?
Psoriasis is diagnosed by its clinical features. If necessary, diagnosis is supported by typical skin biopsy findings.
Assessment of psoriasis
Validated tools used to evaluate psoriasis include:
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)
Self-Administered Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (SAPASI)
Physicians/Patients Global Assessment (PGA)
Body Surface Area (BSA)
Psoriasis Log-based Area and Severity Index (PLASI)
Simplified Psoriasis Index
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI)
The severity of psoriasis is classified as mild in 60% of patients, moderate in 30% and severe in 10%.
Evaluation of comorbidities may include:
Psoriatic Arthritis Screening Evaluation (PASE) or Psoriasis Epidemiology Screening Tool (PEST)
Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Blood sugar/glucose level and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)
Lipid profile, liver function, and uric acid level.
Treatment of psoriasis
Safe limits for alcohol consumption
Maintaining optimal weight — Weight loss interventions (eg, lifestyle changes, bariatric surgery, obesity medications) have been shown to reduce psoriasis severity and extent.
Mild psoriasis is generally treated with topical agents alone. The selected treatment depends on the body site and the extent and severity of psoriasis, and may include:
Emollients and moisturisers
Coal tar preparations
Vitamin D analogue (eg, calcipotriol)
Topical corticosteroids
Combination calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate ointment/gel or foam
Calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus, pimecrolimus)
Most psoriasis centres offer phototherapy (light therapy) with ultraviolet (UV) radiation, often in combination with topical or systemic agents, including:
PUVA (photochemotherapy)
Targeted phototherapy
Moderate to severe psoriasis warrants treatment with a systemic agent and/or phototherapy. The most common treatments are:
Other medicines occasionally used for psoriasis include:
Systemic corticosteroids are best avoided due to the risk of severe withdrawal flare of psoriasis and adverse effects.
Biologic or biological therapy is reserved for severe psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis that have failed to respond to conventional systemic therapy. The use of biologics has increased with the development of novel therapies targeting key inflammatory pathways such as TNF-alpha and IL-17.
Biologics are costly and may result in side effects. They should be initiated by specialists familiar with their use.
TNF-alpha inhibitors:
Interleukin 17 (IL-17) inhibitors:
Interleukin 23 (IL-23) inhibitors:
Adalimumab, etanercept, and ustekinumab have been used to treat severe psoriasis in children.
Icotrokinra is a novel oral peptide that selectively inhibits IL-23. As of March 2026, it has gained FDA approval for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis and is under review by the EMA.
Small molecules: Deucravacitinib, brepocitanib, and ropsacitanib are tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2) inhibitors (see Janus kinase inhibitors).
Tapinarof 1% cream is an aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist that downregulates TH2 cells, IL-17 activation, and disease severity. Tapinarof is undergoing Phase III trials for treatment in the paediatric population.
Branyiczky MK, Lowe M, Vender R. The association between bariatric surgery and improvement in psoriasis: A systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;93(3):845-848. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2025.05.1412. Journal
Chularojanamontri L, Griffiths CE, Chalmers RJ. The Simplified Psoriasis Index (SPI): a practical tool for assessing psoriasis. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133(8):1956–62. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.138. Journal
Fleming P. Tofacitinib: a new oral Janus kinase inhibitor for psoriasis. Br J Dermatol. 2019;180(1):13–14. doi: 10.1111/bjd.17323. Journal
Kamiya K, Kishimoto M, Sugai J, et al. Risk Factors for the Development of Psoriasis. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Sep;20(18):4347. doi: 10.3390/ijms20184347. Journal
Keam SJ. Tapinarof Cream 1%: First Approval. Drugs. 2022;82(11):1221-1228. doi: 10.1007/s40265-022-01748-6. Erratum in: Drugs. 2022 Aug;: Erratum in: Drugs. 2022 Sep;82(13):1433. Journal
Mattei PL, Corey KC, Kimball AB. Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) and the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI): the correlation between disease severity and psychological burden in patients treated with biological therapies. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Mar;28(3):333-7. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12106. Article
Papp K, Gordon K, Thaçi D, et al. Phase 2 trial of selective tyrosine kinase 2 inhibition in psoriasis. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(14):1313–21. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1806382. Journal
Wu JJ, Kavanaugh A, Lebwohl MG, et al. Psoriasis and metabolic syndrome: implications for the management and treatment of psoriasis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Jun;36(6):797-806. doi: 10.1111/jdv.18044. Article
Zhang L, Guo L, Wang L, Jiang X. The efficacy and safety of tofacitinib, peficitinib, solcitinib, baricitinib, abrocitinib and deucravacitinib in plaque psoriasis - A network meta-analysis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Nov;36(11):1937-1946. doi: 10.1111/jdv.18263. Journal
Bibliography for psoriasis in skin of colour
Amico S, Barnetche T, Dequidt L, et al. Characteristics of postinflammatory hyper- and hypopigmentation in patients with psoriasis: a survey study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;83(4):1188-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2020.02.025. Journal
Geng A, McDonald C. Psoriasis. In: Taylor SC, Kelly AP, Lim HW, Serrano AMA (eds). Taylor and Kelly's Dermatology for Skin of Color, 2nd edn. McGraw Hill, 2016: Chapter 24.
Kaufman BP, Alexis AF. Psoriasis in skin of color: insights into the epidemiology, clinical presentation, genetics, quality-of-life impact, and treatment of psoriasis in non-white racial/ethnic groups. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2018;19(3):405-423. Erratum in: Am J Clin Dermatol. 2018 Jun;19(3):425. doi:10.1007/s40257-017-0332-7. Article
Yan D, Afifi L, Jeon C, et al. A cross-sectional study of the distribution of psoriasis subtypes in different ethno-racial groups. Dermatol Online J. 2018;24(7):13030/qt5z21q4k2. Journal
Psoriatic onycholysis case
Generalised pustular psoriasis
Paediatric psoriasis
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Immunotherapy-related psoriasiform reactions
Drug-induced psoriasis
Pustular psoriasis of pregnancy
Psychological effects of psoriasis
Treatment of psoriasis
Treatment of psoriasis in pregnancy
Biological agents for psoriasis
Biologics and novel small molecule treatments, reproduction and psoriasis
Psoriasis: an overview — British Association of Dermatologists
Psoriasis — Medscape
Psoriasis — NICE guidelines
Your guide to psoriasis — The Australasian College of Dermatologists (YouTube video)
The National Psoriasis Foundation (USA)
The Psoriasis Association (UK)
Canadian Psoriasis Network
European Federation of Psoriasis (EUROPSO)
Latin American Psoriasis Network (LATINAPSO)
Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis Alliance (PAPAA)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Atopic Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/atopic-dermatitis]
Atopic dermatitis (Atopic Eczema): Symptoms and Causes — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Atopic dermatitis — extra information
Atopic eczema, Besnier prurigo
EA80, EA80.0, EA80.1, EA80.2, EA80.Y, EA85.20
24079001, 200773006, 402195009, 402196005, 402197001, 402183009
Authors: Dr Amy Stanway, Department of Dermatology, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, February 2004; Updated: Honorary Associate Professor Paul Jarrett, Dermatologist, Middlemore Hospital and Department of Medicine, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, February 2021. Minor internal update May 2023.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is atopic dermatitis?
Atopic dermatitis, also called atopic eczema, the most common inflammatory skin disease worldwide, presents as generalised skin dryness, itch, and rash.
Dry atopic dermatitis in an extensor pattern Acute flexural atopic dermatitis Chronic flexural atopic dermatitis
Who gets atopic dermatitis?
Approximately 230 million people around the world have atopic dermatitis and the lifetime prevalence is >15% especially in wealthier countries. It typically affects people with an ‘atopic tendency’ clustering with hay fever, asthma, and food allergies. All races can be affected; some races are more susceptible to developing atopic dermatitis, and genetic studies are showing marked diversity of the condition’s extent (heterogeneity) between populations.
Atopic dermatitis usually starts in infancy, affecting up to 20% of children. Approximately 80% of children affected develop it before the age of 6 years. All ages can be affected. Although it can settle in late childhood and adolescence, the prevalence in young adults up to 26 years of age is still 5–15%.
Infantile atopic dermatitis on the cheeks Flexural atopic dermatitis in childhood Excoriated lichenified atopic dermatitis on the lower back in an adult
What causes atopic dermatitis?
Atopic dermatitis results from a complex interplay between environmental and genetic factors [see Causes of atopic dermatitis].
What are the clinical features of atopic dermatitis?
The clinical phenotype of atopic dermatitis can vary greatly, but is characterised by remission and relapse with acute flares on a background of chronic dermatitis.
Acute dermatitis is red (erythematous), weeping/crusted (exudative) and may have blisters (vesicles or bullae). Over time the dermatitis becomes chronic and the skin becomes less red but thickened (lichenified) and scaly. Cracking of the skin (fissures) can occur.
Infantile atopic dermatitis
Infantile atopic dermatitis, face Infantile atopic dermatitis, hand Infantile atopic dermatitis, trunk
Toddler and school age atopic dermatitis
As children grow and develop, the distribution of the dermatitis changes. With crawling, the extensor aspects of the elbows and wrists, knees and ankles are affected. The distribution becomes flexural with walking, particularly involving the antecubital and popliteal fossae (elbow and knee creases). Dribble and food can cause dermatitis around the mouth and chin. Scratching and chronic rubbing can cause the skin to become lichenified (thickened and dry), and around the eyes can lead to eye damage. Pityriasis alba, pompholyx, discoid eczema, pityriasis amiantacea, lip licker’s dermatitis, and atopic dirty neck are various manifestations of atopic dermatitis seen particularly in school-age children and adolescents. During the school years, atopic dermatitis often improves, although the barrier function of the skin is never completely normal [see Barrier function in atopic dermatitis].
Childhood atopic dermatitis
Pruritic atopic dermatitis Atopic cheilitis Eyelid atopic eczema
Atopic dermatitis of neck Atopic dermatitis
Adult atopic dermatitis
Adult atopic dermatitis can take a variety of forms. It may continue in the school-age flexural pattern or become diffuse. Madarosis, nodular prurigo, and lichenification may follow chronic rubbing. Discoid and papular patterns can develop. For some who had atopic dermatitis in childhood with subsequent complete resolution, it may recur on the hands due to occupational and domestic duties [see Atopic hand dermatitis]. Unusually, atopic dermatitis may develop for the first time in adulthood, as ‘adult onset’ atopic dermatitis. In women and some men, involvement of the nipples and areolae can be problematic [see Nipple eczema].
Atopic hand dermatitis Lichenified flexural atopic dermatitis Atopic dermatitis, nipples
Keratosis pilaris, white dermographism, hyperlinear palms, and Dennie-Morgan folds can be useful clues for atopy. A Dennie-Morgan fold is a fold of skin under the lower eyelids due to chronic eyelid dermatitis.
Clues to atopic dermatitis in adults
Madarosis due to rubbing of eyebrows Hyperlinear palm Lichenification
Dermoscopy of dermatitis shows a patchy distribution of dotted vessels, focal white scales, and yellow serocrust. The yellow-clod sign is seen particularly in acute exudative dermatitis.
Dermoscopy of atopic dermatitis in skin of colour
Patches of atopic dermatitis in skin of colour Focal white scale and patchy dotted vessels on dermoscopy
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
There are ethnic variations in patterns of atopic dermatitis. In Māori, Pacific Islanders, and Africans, the papular variant is observed. Perifollicular and extensor, rather than flexural, patterns may also be more common in patients of African descent.
Conventional scoring systems for atopic dermatitis may underestimate the severity of disease and effects on quality of life in those with skin of colour due to the erythema appearing violaceous. Underestimation may also occur due to cultural factors and communication difficulties between patients, parents, and healthcare providers.
Patients with skin of colour appear to be at particular risk of developing lichen simplex and nodular prurigo with scratching and rubbing.
Postinflammatory hypo- and hyper-pigmentation occurs more commonly with skin of colour and can be more noticeable than in ethnic white skin, resulting in significant psychological distress.
Atopic dermatitis in skin of colour
Follicular pattern of atopic dermatitis Atopic hand dermatitis and follicular pattern on the trunk Hyperpigmentation due to atopic dermatitis Postinflammatory hypopigmentation due to atopic dermatitis Lichenification of atopic dermatitis Nodular prurigo
What are the complications of atopic dermatitis?
Complications of atopic dermatitis are covered in detail on other DermNet webpages.
Complications of atopic dermatitis
Psychological effects of atopic dermatitis
Staphylococcal skin infection
Eczema herpeticum, Eczema coxsackium, Molluscum contagiosum
Infective complications of atopic dermatitis
Eczema herpeticum Molluscum contagiosum arising in atopic dermatitis Staphylococcal infection of atopic dermatitis
How is atopic dermatitis diagnosed?
Atopic dermatitis is usually diagnosed clinically and investigations are not required. Patch testing should be considered, particularly if the dermatitis becomes resistant to treatment [see Guidelines for the diagnosis and assessment of eczema, Atopy patch test, Eczema pathology].
EASI and SCORAD are two scoring systems developed to document the severity of atopic eczema.
What is the differential diagnosis for atopic dermatitis?
The list of differential diagnoses for atopic dermatitis is long. A short list of common and important diagnoses to consider in children include:
Seborrhoeic dermatitis and psoriasis
Genetic disorders with scaly skin, including inherited forms of ichthyosis, primary immunodeficiency diseases, and inherited metabolic disorders
A more extensive, but still not exhaustive, list is provided in Guidelines for the diagnosis and assessment of eczema.
What is the treatment for atopic dermatitis?
The treatment of atopic dermatitis is covered in detail on other DermNet webpages: Treatment of atopic dermatitis
What is the outcome for atopic dermatitis?
Atopic dermatitis affects 15–20% of children and is less common in adults. Sensitive skin persists lifelong. It is impossible to predict whether atopic dermatitis will improve by itself or not in an individual. A meta-analysis including over 110,000 subjects found that 20% of children with atopic dermatitis had persistent disease 8 years later; fewer than 5% had persistent disease 20 years later. Children who developed atopic dermatitis before the age of 2 years had a lower risk of persistent disease than those who developed atopic dermatitis later in childhood or adolescence.
Atopic dermatitis is typically worst between the ages of two and four years, and often improves or even clears after this. However, atopic dermatitis may be aggravated or reappear in adult life due to exposure to irritants or allergens related to caregiving, domestic duties, or certain occupations.
Abuabara K, Yu AM, Okhovat JP, Allen IE, Langan SM. The prevalence of atopic dermatitis beyond childhood: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Allergy. 2018;73(3):696–704. doi:10.1111/all.13320. PubMed
Asher MI, Montefort S, Björkstén B, et al. Worldwide time trends in the prevalence of symptoms of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in childhood: ISAAC Phases One and Three repeat multicountry cross-sectional surveys [published correction appears in Lancet. 2007 Sep 29;370(9593):1128]. Lancet. 2006;368(9537):733–43. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69283-0. PubMed
Errichetti E, Stinco G. Dermoscopy in general dermatology: a practical overview. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2016;6(4):471–507. doi:10.1007/s13555-016-0141-6. Journal
Kaufman BP, Guttman-Yassky E, Alexis AF. Atopic dermatitis in diverse racial and ethnic groups-variations in epidemiology, genetics, clinical presentation and treatment. Exp Dermatol. 2018;27(4):340–57. doi:10.1111/exd.13514. PubMed
Kristal L, Klein PA. Atopic dermatitis in infants and children. An update. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47(4):877–95. doi:10.1016/s0031-3955(05)70246-7. PubMed
Langan SM, Irvine AD, Weidinger S. Atopic dermatitis [published correction appears in Lancet. 2020 Sep 12;396(10253):758]. Lancet. 2020;396(10247):345–60. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1. PubMed
Seghers AC, Lee JS, Tan CS, et al. Atopic dirty neck or acquired atopic hyperpigmentation? An epidemiological and clinical study from the National Skin Centre in Singapore. Dermatology. 2014;229(3):174–82. doi:10.1159/000362596. PubMed
Torrelo A. Atopic dermatitis in different skin types. What is to know?. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28 Suppl 3:2–4. doi:10.1111/jdv.12480. PubMed
Torres T, Ferreira EO, Gonçalo M, Mendes-Bastos P, Selores M, Filipe P. Update on atopic dermatitis. Acta Med Port. 2019;32(9):606–13. doi:10.20344/amp.11963. PubMed
Weidinger S, Beck LA, Bieber T, Kabashima K, Irvine AD. Atopic dermatitis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4(1):1. doi:10.1038/s41572-018-0001-z. PubMed
Atopic hand dermatitis
Antimicrobial peptides
Atopic hand dermatitis
Barrier function in atopic dermatitis
Causes of atopic dermatitis
Guidelines for the diagnosis and assessment of eczema
Psychological effects of atopic dermatitis
Treatment of atopic dermatitis
Eczema: A Complete Overview – DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Kidshealth.org.nz videos:
Eczema care: 3 easy steps
Eczema care: Moisturiser
Eczema care: bathing
Eczema care: Steroids
Eczema — Medline Plus
New Zealand National Clinical Network for the treatment of Eczema in Children and Youth
Eczema Association of Australia Inc.
Eczema Association of New Zealand
The National Eczema Society (British)
National Association for Science and Education (US)
Eczema Care Online Toolkit — Eczema Support Australia
Eczema Care Online Toolkit — Eczema Support UK
Atopic dermatitis — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Atopic dermatitis in Emergency Medicine — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Eczema Guide — SkinCareGuide.com
Eczema (Atopic Eczema) — British Association of Dermatologists
Patient information: Atopic dermatitis (eczema) (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate
Atopic eczema — NHS Choices
Atopic Dermatitis (Eczema): Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Atopic dermatitis — American Academy of Dermatology
Your guide to eczema — The Australasian College of Dermatologists – YouTube
Eczema Written Action Plan (EWAP) — University of Bristol Centre for Academic Primary Care
Systematic reviews on eczema — University of Nottingham
Patient-oriented eczema measure (POEM)
AltogetherEczema — a central hub for people affected by eczema. International Alliance of Dermatology Patient Organizations (IADPO)
Steroid-impregnated tape — YouTube: demonstrating tape application
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rosacea]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rosacea]
Rosacea: Symptoms, Causes, and Management - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rosacea — extra information
Acne rosacea, Acne erythematosa
ED90, ED90.0, ED90.01, ED90.02, ED90.0Y, 9A02.1, BD93.1Y
398909004, 200933006, 95244005, 238750001, 724848006, 403366003, 231800009, 19877001, 257006, 75867005, 397845003, 10128002, 371097007
Author: Dr Olivia Kuo, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, March 2022; minor update September 2024.
Previous contributors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist; Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, New Zealand, 2014. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin condition predominantly affecting the central face and most often starts between the age of 30–60 years.
Rosacea is common and is characterised by persistent facial redness. It typically has a relapsing and remitting course, with symptoms controlled by lifestyle measures, general skin care, medications, and procedural interventions.
Papulopustular rosacea on the cheeks Erythematotelangiectatic and papulopustular rosacea on the cheeks Papular rosacea on the cheeks Telangiectatic vessels in a rinophyma shown on dermoscopy (RO-patient4)Rhinophyma and papular rosacea on the chin (RO-patient2)Papulopustular and ocular rosacea
Rosacea is estimated to affect around 5% of adults worldwide. Although rosacea is often thought to affect women more than men, studies have revealed an approximately equal gender distribution.
Rosacea typically presents after the age of 30 and becomes more prevalent with age. However, it can occur at any age and occasionally presents in children. Although rosacea can affect anyone, it is more common in those with fair skin, blue eyes, and those of Celtic or North European descent. It may be more difficult and under-recognised in patients with skin of colour.
Rosacea has been associated with depression, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, anxiety disorder, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, migraine, rheumatoid arthritis, Helicobacter pylori infection, ulcerative colitis, and dementia.
What causes rosacea?
The pathogenesis of rosacea is thought to be multifactorial and includes:
Genetic susceptibility
Association with single nucleotide polymorphisms related to the class II major histocompatibility complex.
Altered microbiome of the skin and gut
Bacterial overgrowth of the small intestine, Helicobacter pylori infection, and increased density of Demodex folliculorum and Staphylococcus epidermidis on the skin may play a role in skin inflammation.
Dysregulation of the immune response may lead to excessive inflammation, vasodilation, lymphatic dilatation, and angiogenesis.
Neurocutaneous mechanisms
Triggers include ultraviolet (UV) radiation, temperature change, exercise, spicy foods, alcohol, psychological stress, air pollution, and tobacco smoking. Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) may play a role in flushing and erythema.
Impaired skin barrier
Affected skin displays features indicating skin barrier impairment, allowing bacterial colonisation and inflammation.
In the skin of patients with rosacea, there is increased expression and activity of toll-like receptor 2, cathelicidins, kallikrein 5, and mast cells.
Furthermore, cathelicidin LL-37 increases sensitivity of the skin to the sun.
The result is an exaggerated innate immune reaction to the initial trigger.
Dominant T-helper (Th)1/Th17 gene expression in all features of rosacea.
Increased Th17 expression can increase levels of cathelicidin LL-37 in keratinocytes and drive further inflammation.
The most significant environmental trigger is UV radiation; affected skin is more sensitive to exposure. UV radiation can damage the dermis and increase skin inflammation.
What are the clinical features of rosacea?
Cutaneous features include:
Transient recurrent erythema, ie, flushing
Persistent facial erythema
Facial skin other than in the nasal alar region
Eyelid margin telangiectasia
Together often termed erythematotelangiectatic rosacea
Inflammatory papules and pustules (papulopustular)
Thickening of the skin due to hyperplasia/fibrosis of the sebaceous glands of the face
Most common area affected is the nose (termed rhinophyma)
More commonly present in men.
Rhinophyma Rhinophyma showing swelling and sebeceous gland openings (RO-patient1)Steroid induced papulopustular rosacea Steroid induced rosacea on the forehead Steroid induced facial rosacea Steroid induced papular rosacea Swelling and papulopustules in steroid induced rosacea (SR-patient4)
Occasionally rosacea induces facial lymphoedema (Morbihan disease), producing redness, and swelling of the face and lids.
Facial tenderness and burning pain accompanied by redness and flushing (neurogenic rosacea) is a rare variant of rosacea.
Lid lymphoedema and glabellar swelling in Morbihan disease Violaceous swelling of the lower lids in Morbihan disease
Non-cutaneous ocular features (affects over 50% of patients with rosacea):
Foreign-body sensation
Keratitis — can lead to long-term eyesight impairment.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Rosacea is diagnosed more frequently in fair-skinned patients of Celtic and Northern European descent.
It may be harder to identify key features of rosacea in patients with skin of colour. These features are likely under-recognised and rosacea may be underdiagnosed in these patients.
What are the complications of rosacea?
Complications of rosacea include:
Inflammatory eye complications, eg, blepharokeratoconjunctivitis, sclerokeratitis
Physical discomfort, eg, from ocular symptoms
Negative psychosocial effects such as increased anxiety, depression, low self-esteem, and social isolation
Trigger avoidance leading to lifestyle limitations.
How is rosacea diagnosed?
In patients with darker phototypes where erythema and telangiectasia (visible blood vessels) is more difficult to visualise, greater emphasis may be placed on other major and minor features.
Persistent centrofacial erythema associated with periodic intensification by potential trigger factors
Major criteria (must occur in centrofacial distribution)
Flushing/transient centrofacial erythema
Inflammatory papules and pustules
Telangiectasia — visible blood vessels (excluding nasal alar telangiectases, which are common in adults)
Ocular rosacea (lid margin telangiectasia, blepharitis, keratitis/conjunctivitis/sclerokeratitis/anterior uveitis).
Burning sensation of the skin
Stinging sensation of the skin
Dry sensation of the skin.
What is the differential diagnosis for rosacea?
Other conditions that could present with similar cutaneous features include:
Demodicosis (demodex folliculitis)
Idiopathic facial aseptic granuloma
Periorificial dermatitis or periocular dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Steroid-induced acne
Steroid-induced rosacea
Systemic lupus erythematosus.
What is the treatment for rosacea?
Although there is no cure for rosacea, symptoms can be managed with the following lifestyle measures, medical, and procedural interventions.
All patients with rosacea should receive education on general skincare and lifestyle measures.
Encourage patients to record a symptom diary to aid the identification of triggers:
Common triggers include spicy food, hot/cold temperatures (hot baths), exercise, sun exposure, cosmetic products, medications (those that cause vasodilation), alcohol, fruits and vegetables, dairy, marinated meat products
Avoid the triggers identified.
General skincare advice
Moisturise frequently
Use gentle over-the-counter cleansers
Mild, synthetic detergent-based cleansers rather than traditional soaps due to risk of irritation
Use physical sunscreens (ie, zinc oxide/titanium oxide) with SPF ≥ 30
Provides broad-spectrum UV radiation and visible light protection
May be better tolerated than chemical sunscreens
Avoid alcohol-based topical products
Avoid use of topical steroids as they may aggravate the condition
Cosmetics with a green tint are useful to minimise the appearance of redness.
Psychosocial considerations
Assess the patient’s psychosocial burden of disease and consider referral for psychological support where necessary.
Existing treatments for rosacea can be very effective — however, they often target only one feature. This means that a combination of therapies are required where patients present with multiple features and in severe rosacea.
Many of the following treatments are first-line therapies recommended by the 2019 ROSCO panel:
Transient erythema (flushing)
Alpha-adrenergic agonists (topical brimonidine, topical oxymetazoline) — they are often used infrequently for special occasions only, as persistent use may result in rebound flushing on discontinuation
Oral beta-blockers (carvedilol)
Oral clonidine may reduce flushing
CGRP antagonists (erenumab)
Transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation has demonstrated some promising clinical trial results
Alpha-adrenergic agonists (topical brimonidine, topical oxymetazoline, as above)
Intense pulsed light therapy
Inflammatory papules/pustules
Topical azelaic acid (for mild/moderate only)
Topical metronidazole (for mild/moderate only)
Topical erythromycin
Oral tetracyclines (oxytetracycline, lymecycline, doxycycline)
Oral macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin)
Oral isotretinoin often at low dose (for refractory disease only)
Intense pulsed light therapy
Oral beta-adrenergic blockers
Consideration of endoscopic sympathectomy
If clinically inflamed: doxycycline, isotretinoin
If clinically non-inflamed: physical modalities to remove excess tissue and reshape the structures (eg, ablative CO2 laser, erbium laser, radiofrequency, surgical debulking).
Increase dietary intake of omega-3 fatty acids
Gentle eyelash/eyelid cleansing to express sebum trapped in the meibomian glands
First-line medical management
If mild-moderate: topical azithromycin/topical calcineurin inhibitors
If severe: azithromycin, doxycycline.
For more information, see Ocular rosacea.
What is the outcome for rosacea?
Although rosacea is not a life-threatening condition, it is a chronic disease that requires long-term management of relapsing and remitting symptoms. Complete resolution of clinical features has been shown to prolong time to symptom relapse and have greater positive impact on quality of life compared with incomplete resolution.
Alexis AF, Callender VD, Baldwin HE, Desai SR, Rendon MI, Taylor SC. Global epidemiology and clinical spectrum of rosacea, highlighting skin of color: Review and clinical practice experience. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(6):1722–9.e7. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.08.049. Journal
Gether L, Overgaard LK, Egeberg A, Thyssen JP. Incidence and prevalence of rosacea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Dermatology. 2018;179:282–9. doi 10.1111/bjd.16481. Journal
Haber R, El Gemayel M. Comorbidities in rosacea: A systematic review and update. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78(4):786-792.e8. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.016. Journal
Hampton PJ, Berth-Jones J, Duarte Williamson CE, Hay R, Leslie TA, Porter I, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of people with rosacea 2021. 2021;185:725–35. doi 10.1111/bjd.20485. Journal
Marson J, Baldwin H. Rosacea: a wholistic review and update from pathogenesis to diagnosis and therapy. International Journal of Dermatology. 2020.59(6):e175–e182. doi 10.1111/ijd.14757. Journal
Parkins GJ, Maan A, Dawn G. Neurogenic rosacea: an uncommon and poorly recognized entity?. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2015;40(8):930-931. doi:10.1111/ced.12630 Journal
Schaller M, Almeida LMC, Bewley A, Cribier B, Del Rosso J, Dlova NC, et al. Recommendations for rosacea diagnosis, classification and management: update from the global ROSacea COnsensus 2019 panel. 2020;182:1269–76. doi 10.1111/bjd.18420. Journal
Scharschmidt TC, Yost JM, Truong SV, Steinhoff M, Wang KC, Berger TG. Neurogenic rosacea: a distinct clinical subtype requiring a modified approach to treatment. Arch Dermatol. 2011;147(1):123–6. doi:10.1001/archdermatol.2010.413. Journal
Van Zuuren EJ, Arents BWM, van der Linden, MMD, Vermeulen S, Fedorowicz Z, Tan J, et al. Rosacea: New Concepts in Classification and Treatment. American Journal of Clinical Dermatology. 2021;22:457–65. doi 10.1007/s40257-021-00595-7. Journal
Webster G, Schaller M, Tan J, Jackson JM, Kerrouche N, Schäfer G. Defining treatment success in rosacea as ‘clear’ may provide multiple patient benefits: results of a pooled analysis. Journal of Dermatological Treatment. 2017;28(5):469–74. doi 10.1080/09546634.2017.1343435. Journal
Pyoderma faciale (rosacea fulminans)
Acne, Rosacea, and Perioral Dermatitis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
National Rosacea Society
British Skin Foundation — Rosacea
Patient — Rosacea and Rhinophyma
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Vitiligo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/vitiligo]
Vitiligo: Causes, Types, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Vitiligo — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory, Pigmentary disorders
L80, H02.73, L81.5, D23.9, L67.1
ED63.0, 9A06.1, ED63.Y, ED73.11, 9A04.Y, 2F20.Y
56727007, 403371008, 403270009, 87666009, 403267005, 403268000, 403269008, 721539008, 402621008, 23006000, 398028009, 450772009, 14240001, 201175002, 50305006
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Pigmentary disorders
Author: Dr Bushra Alsayaydeh, Dermatologist, Amman, Jordan, August 2022. Previously: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Vitiligo is an acquired, chronic, depigmenting disorder of the skin, in which pigment-producing cells (melanocytes) that determine the colour of skin, hair, and eyes are progressively lost. It appears as milky-white patches of skin (leukoderma) and can be cosmetically very disabling, particularly in people with dark skin.
It is currently widely accepted that vitiligo is the result of autoimmune destruction of melanocytes.
Vitiligo over the knuckles - keobnerisation due to trauma often localises vitiligo Symmetrical wrist vitiligo - a common location (V-patient1)Vitiligo over the back and elbows Vitiligo on the lid with poliosis of the lashes Vitiligo on the lips Follicular repigmentation in a patch of vitiligo Extensive symmetrical facial vitiligo Vitiligo around the hairline of a Samoan woman (V-patient3)
Vitiligo affects 0.5–2% of the population.
Race: relatively consistent incidence in all races, but appears to be:
Less common in the Han Chinese population
More common in India (up to 8.8% of the population).
Sex: both men and women appear to be equally affected
Onset: the average age of onset is between 20–24 years, but can occur at any age. Typically, there are two peaks of onset, early (<10 years) or late (around 30 years).
Inheritance: follows a polygenic pattern, with a 23% monozygotic twin concordance, supporting the cause of vitiligo to be multifactorial (genetic and non-genetic environmental factors).
More than 20–30% of the affected individuals report vitiligo in a first or second-degree relative.
Autoimmune disease development has been associated with generalized vitiligo, the most common type of vitiligo, especially if there is a family history of vitiligo and other autoimmune disorders.
The strongest association is with thyroid disease, which can affect up to 15% of adults and 5–10% of children with vitiligo.
Other less frequently associated autoimmune disorders with vitiligo are:
Rheumatoid arthritis
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (mostly adult-onset)
Pernicious anaemia (B12 deficiency)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Other autoimmune dermatologic conditions, eg, psoriasis and lichen sclerosus.
Vitiligo is also three times more common in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow and stem-cell transplants than in the healthy population.
What causes vitiligo?
Vitiligo is due to the loss or destruction of melanocytes (melanin-producing cells).
Genetic factors appear to contribute to 80% of vitiligo risk, whilst environmental factors account for 20%. Many genetic loci have been identified, all related to the immune system, except for TYR which encodes tyrosinase, a key enzyme in melanin production and a major autoantigen in vitiligo.
The convergence or integrated theory combines immunological, biochemical, oxidative, and environmental mechanisms that work jointly in those with a genetic susceptibility is widely accepted.
This could be explained through three phases:
Initial phase: less adhesive melanocytes are prone to internal and external oxidative stresses, leading to the production of more toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Progression phase: an imbalance between ROS and antioxidants will activate the adaptive immune system bridged by the innate immune system.
CD8+ cytotoxic cells release cytokines, mainly interferon-γ (INF-γ) that activate the JAK-STAT pathway through its receptors on keratinocytes. This will lead to the production of chemokines (CXC), predominantly by keratinocytes, but also by melanocytes themselves, leading to IFN-γ–CXCR3- CXCL9/10 axis loop feedback.
Acting together on their common CXCR3 receptor, CXCL9 drives the main bulk of CD8+ cell homing, while CXCL10 promotes their localisation to affected skin lesions and induction of melanocyte apoptosis through CXC3B activation. Of note, where both humoral (antibody) and T-cell responses appear to be implicated, antibody titres do not correlate with disease activity nor the localisation of distinct vitiligo lesions.
Maintenance phase: established lesions are maintained by resident melanocyte reactive T-cells (TRM cells), through the IL15-dependent pathway. These TRM cells may be responsible for what is called an ‘autoimmune memory’, in which relapses occur mostly at the same exact site of previous lesions.
Understanding the molecular pathogenesis of vitiligo serves as a promising source for the development of more targeted therapies.
Vitiligo and other conditions
Vitiligo is also a component of some rare multiorgan syndromes, such as:
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
Alezzandrini syndrome.
These syndromes affect organs that normally house melanocytes, and are now believed to constitute one disease entity with variable clinical expression.
Other rare dermatologic syndromes that present with lesions indistinguishable from vitiligo are:
APECED (APS1) syndrome
Schmidt’s (APS2) syndrome.
A vitiligo-like leukoderma may occur in patients with metastatic melanoma.
Vitiligo can also be induced by drugs, such as immune checkpoint inhibitors (pembrolizumab, nivolumab) and BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib) used to treat metastatic melanoma.
What are the clinical features of vitiligo?
The onset of vitiligo is usually insidious.
The most common presentation is the complete loss of pigment in single or multiple macules or patches of skin, with characteristic chalk- or milky-white colour.
Lesion characteristics
Typically asymptomatic, but rarely pruritic in active lesions.
Multiple macules are sometimes described as confetti-like.
Well-defined with convex borders; the borders may sometimes either be:
The colour of unaffected skin
Hyperpigmented or hypopigmented
Sometimes smaller patches coalesce, merging into more complex shapes.
Can be found on any part of the body, although more common in sun-exposed areas or areas more prone to repetitive trauma (eg, eyelids, lips, nostrils, fingertips, and toes), body folds (armpits, groin, navel), and nipples. Interestingly, these areas are naturally more pigmented.
Vitiligo also favours sites of injury; this is called the isomorphic Koebner phenomenon. Injury can be induced by either:
Physical (cuts, abrasions, scratching)
Mechanical (friction, chronic pressure, eg, eye rubbing, lip-licking, watches, tight-fitting clothes)
Burns (chemical, sunburn)
Inflammation (psoriasis, herpes zoster, dermatitis)
Therapeutic (phototherapy, radiotherapy).
Vitiligo can occur in less pigmented areas of skin that can be often overlooked especially in light-skinned patients, eg, the palms and soles, and oral mucosa.
Precipitating factors and other features
Emotional stress, pregnancy, oral contraceptives, vitamin deficiencies, and many other factors have been described as precipitating factors for vitiligo; however, correlation is still not proven.
Vitiligo may occasionally start as multiple halo naevi.
Halo naevi can precede or coincide with vitiligo.
Loss of hair colour, (leukotrichia or poliosis), may affect the scalp, eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair in 10–60% of patients. It does not correlate with disease activity, but could be a predictor of poorer response to therapy due to the destruction of melanocyte reservoir in hair follicles.
Premature hair greying has been described but the association is still uncertain.
The retina may be affected, however, the colour of the iris does not change.
Sensory hearing impairment has been described in some patients with vitiligo, presumably due to cochlear melanocyte loss, but clear evidence is lacking.
Sunburn in vitiligo lesions may be a problem
Some evidence suggests that people with vitiligo might have a lower risk for internal malignancies and skin cancer.
Two nationwide retrospective studies from South Korea and Taiwan, have shown that vitiligo patients are at lower risk of internal malignancies, in addition to lower BCC and SCC risk in the Taiwanese study.
Another retrospective study of 1307 vitiligo patients found individuals with vitiligo are at lower risk for both melanoma and NMSC. However, some of these studies found a possible higher risk for thyroid cancer.
Other large European cohorts found a relative reduction in risk of non-melanoma skin cancers.
Severity is variable and there is no way to predict how much or how fast pigment will be lost.
Vitiligo appears more evident in patients with naturally dark skin.
Extension of vitiligo can occur over a few months, then it stabilises.
Some spontaneous repigmentation may occur from the hair follicles, and the overall size of the white patch may reduce.
At some time in the future, the vitiligo is likely to extend again.
Cycles of pigment loss followed by periods of stability may continue indefinitely.
Light-skinned people usually notice pigment loss during the summer as the contrast between the affected skin and suntanned skin becomes more distinct.
The pigment has occasionally been reported to be lost from the entire skin surface.
Active disease predictors are peripheral hypopigmentation, confetti-like depigmentation, ill- rather than well-defined borders, and the Koebner phenomenon.
For more information, see the section on severity assessment below.
How is vitiligo classified?
Non-segmental vitiligo
Tends to be bilateral and symmetrical in distribution.
Uni-segmental, bi- or multi-segmental
Single white patch in 90%
Border often irregular + leukotrichia
Rapid onset, remains stable after the first six months to two years
Cutaneous mosaicism (Blaschkoid, dermatomal, phylloid, checkerboard patterns)
Non-segmental combined with segmental vitiligo
Bilateral segmental follows non-segmental (months-years)
Predictors to transform into mixed variant: leukotrichia, halo naevi
Unclassified vitiligo
Multifocal asymmetrical non-segmental
Punctate (confetti or vitiligo- ponctué)
Hypochromic (minor) vitiligo
Punctate: small macules (1–2 mm). Called leukoderma punctata, if there are no other classical vitiligo patches
Hypochromic (minor): in type V/ VI skin, mainly seborrheic distribution
Follicular: prominent leukotrichia with absent/ limited skin involvement
Rare clinical subtypes of vitiligo include:
Trichrome vitiligo: describes three shades of skin colour, where there is an intermediate hypopigmented hue between the white patch and the normal skin.
Quadrichrome and pentachrome vitiligo: four and five shades of colours has been rarely described with multiple shades of tan brown, in addition to white and normal skin colour.
Red vitiligo: white patches that have raised, red, inflammatory borders.
Blue vitiligo: post-inflammatory patches with a bluish-grey hue that correlate histologically with pigment incontinence in dermal melanophages.
How is the severity of vitiligo assessed?
At least two scoring systems have been devised for vitiligo and are used in clinical trials.
Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (VASI)
Vitiligo European Task Force (VETF) system
VASI is based on the PASI scoring system for psoriasis. It measures the extent and degree of depigmentation in 6 sites: hands, upper extremities, trunk, lower extremities/feet, and the head and neck.
VETF is based on SCORAD scoring system for atopic dermatitis. The VETF assesses the extent, staging, and spreading/progression in 5 sites: head/neck, trunk, arms, legs and hands/feet. It grades from 0 (normal pigmentation) to 4 (complete hair whitening). Spreading is assessed using the following scores: 0 (stable disease), -1 (regressive disease) and +1 (progressive disease).
VETF includes a clinical assessment form to record the sex, age, duration of disease, age of onset, episodes of repigmentation, the impact of vitiligo on quality of life, family history, additional medical conditions, and the Fitzpatrick skin type of the patients.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The distribution and characteristics of vitiligo patches are similar in different skin types; however, while vitiligo can be barely noticeable in some people with lighter skin complexions, it is usually more obvious in darker skin types. This can cause significant cosmetic disability, along with its psychological consequences.
What are the complications of vitiligo?
Cosmetically disabling
Psychosocial stresses and social stigmata to affected individuals, particularly in people with dark skin.
Higher risk of acquiring an associated autoimmune condition among individuals with vitiligo compared to the general population.
Vitiligo has an otherwise benign nature with most of those affected being in good health.
How is vitiligo diagnosed?
Vitiligo is usually a clinical diagnosis, based on its characteristic appearance, and no specific tests are required to make the diagnosis.
Tools that can aid in diagnosis include:
Enhances white patches, making it easier to see less conspicuous lesions.
Especially helpful in light-skinned people, patches with partial loss of pigment, or to monitor response to therapy.
The UVA is absorbed by collagen fibres in the dermis, and fluoresces back as bright white in absence of epidermal melanin (which normally absorbs UVA).
Characteristically shows a white glow, with some clues that can help in differentiating between stable and active disease [see Dermoscopy of vitiligo].
Occasionally recommended, particularly in early or inflammatory vitiligo, when a lymphocytic infiltration may be observed.
Where melanocytes are typically absent in the epidermis of established vitiligo patches, some argue that total loss of melanocytes never occurs, indicating potential functionality restoration with treatment.
To assess other potential autoimmune diseases or polyglandular syndromes may be arranged, especially if combined with a positive family history
Examples include thyroid function tests, ANA, and B12 levels.
What is the differential diagnosis for vitiligo?
For localised vitiligo lesions
Naevus depigmentosus.
For generalised vitiligo
Inherited hypomelanosis
Waardenburg syndrome.
Hypomelanosis of Ito (pigmentary mosaicism).
Secondary hypomelanosis
Infectious: pityriasis versicolor, leprosy (tuberculoid/lepromatous), secondary syphilis, treponematosis and onchocerciasis (late stages).
Post-inflammatory: lichen sclerosus et atrophicus, morphoea/ scleroderma, discoid lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, and after-burn.
Paraneoplastic: cutaneous lymphoma (mycosis fungoides), cutaneous melanoma (localized/ distant autoimmune reaction)
Drug/ toxin-induced:
Systemic: imatinib, chloroquine, fluphenazine, physostigmine, targeted melanoma immunotherapy.
Topical: imiquimod, corticosteroids.
Occupational exposure: phenolic compounds; mainly on exposed skin (hands, face).
Progressive macular hypomelanosis.
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis.
What is the treatment for vitiligo?
There is no cure for vitiligo and treatment is often unsatisfactory. The aim is to stop progression of the disease (stabilisation), and to achieve satisfactory re-pigmentation.
Treatment is most successful on the face and trunk; whereas hands, feet, and areas with white hair respond poorly. Compared to long-standing patches, new ones are more likely to respond to medical therapy.
While the hair follicle is the main source of pigment restoration, another potential reservoir can be at the borders of the white patches. When successful re-pigmentation occurs, melanocyte stem cells (DOPA-negative) in the middle and lower outer root sheath (ORS), or bulge at the base of the hair follicle are activated (become larger, with intense DOPA oxidase activity). They migrate to the skin surface to form pigment islands, appearing as perifollicular brown macules. Otherwise, re-pigmentation can occur in less common patterns such as marginal, diffuse, or combined.
A cut, graze, or scratch may lead to a new patch of vitiligo
Minimise skin injury by wearing protective loose-fitting clothing.
Cosmetic camouflage can disguise vitiligo. Options include:
Make-up, dyes, and stains
Dihydroxyacetone-containing products — "tan without the sun."
Micropigmentation or tattooing for stable vitiligo.
Sun protection with clothing, sunscreen use, and lifestyle modification.
Depigmented skin can only burn on exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR); it cannot tan.
Sunburn may cause vitiligo to spread.
Tanning of normal skin makes vitiligo patches appear more visible.
There are several modalities that are proven to be helpful in vitiligo. Optimal therapeutic response is often seen with combination therapies.
Topical corticosteroids
Can be used on the trunk and limbs for up to 3 months.
Calcineurin inhibitors (pimecrolimus cream and tacrolimus ointment)
Preferred for vitiligo affecting the eyelids, face, neck, armpits, and groin, because, unlike topical steroids, they do not cause skin atrophy.
Topical vitamin D derivatives (calcipotriol, tacalcitol)
Second line; effective only as combination therapy.
A Janus kinase 1 and 2 inhibitor that is FDA approved for the treatment of non-segmental vitiligo in adult and paediatric patients 12 years of age and older.
Significant clinical improvement for facial vitiligo, in individuals 12 years and older with non-segmental vitiligo with 10% or less affected BSA, with sustained safety after 52 weeks has been seen in two phase 3 double-blind clinical trials. Body vitiligo showed less dramatic response.
Other controversial therapies include pseudocatalase and topical prostaglandin inhibitors
Further studies are needed to confirm efficacy.
Phototherapy refers to treatment with ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Options include:
Whole-body or localised UVB phototherapy
Excimer laser UVB (308 nm) or targeted UVB for small areas of vitiligo
Oral, topical, or bathwater photochemotherapy (PUVA)
Phototherapy probably works in vitiligo by two mechanisms.
Immune suppression — preventing the destruction of the melanocytes
Stimulation of cytokines (growth factors).
Treatment is usually given twice weekly for a trial period of 3–4 months. If re-pigmentation is observed, treatment is continued until re-pigmentation is complete or for a maximum of 1–2 years.
Phototherapy is unsuitable for very fair-skinned people.
The treatment intensity aims for the vitiligo skin to be a light "carnation" pink.
If re-pigmentation is observed, treatment is continued until re-pigmentation is complete or for a maximum of 1–2 years.
It is essential to avoid burning (red, blistered, peeling, itchy or painful skin), as this could cause the vitiligo to get worse.
A meta-analysis of 35 different studies reporting outcomes after phototherapy for generalised vitiligo. A marked or clinically useful response was achieved in 36% after 12 months of narrowband UVB and in 62% after 12 months of PUVA. The face and neck responded better than the trunk, which responded better than the extremities. It was not very effective on the hands and feet.
Short pulse therapy to slow rapid progression, or as mini-pulse oral steroids to stabilize active disease, eg, dexamethasone 2.5–4 mg, for two consecutive days per week, for 3–6 months.
Mycophenolate mofetil
Oral minocycline 100 mg/day, a tetracycline antibiotic with anti-inflammatory properties
Subcutaneous afamelanotide
An α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) analogue. Showed superior re-pigmentation when combined with NB-UVB, but excessive tanning in unaffected surrounding skin made final cosmetic results less satisfying.
None of these treatments are based on randomised controlled trial data.
Surgical treatment of stable vitiligo
Surgical treatment for stable and segmental vitiligo requires removal of the top layer of vitiligo skin (by shaving, dermabrasion, sandpapering, or laser) and replacement with pigmented skin removed from another site.
Non-cultured melanocyte-keratinocyte cell suspension transplantation
Punch grafting (mini-grafting)
Blister grafts, formed by suction or cryotherapy
Cultured autografts of melanocytes grown in tissue culture.
Depigmentation therapy
Depigmentation therapy, using 20% monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone (MBEH), may be considered in severely affected, dark-skinned individuals with vitiligo that has failed to re-pigment spontaneously or with therapy.
Cryotherapy and laser treatment (eg, 755-nm Q-switched alexandrite or 694 nm Q-switched ruby) have also been used successfully to depigment small areas of vitiligo.
Other novel potential therapies that are still under research include those targeting IFN-γ–JAK–STAT1 pathway (targeting CXCL9/10), anti-IL15 and anti-CD122 (targeting TRM), Wnt signalling antagonists, and others.
Psychosocial support
Vitiligo results in reduced quality of life and psychological difficulties in many patients, with problems like depression and poor self-esteem, especially in adolescents and in females. Patients should be assured that there is always something on the table to help in managing their condition, from using camouflage to available therapies with possible measurable improvement. The psychosocial impacts of vitiligo tend to be more severe in some countries, cultures, and religions than in others.
Family support, counselling, and cognitive behavioural treatment can be of benefit.
How do you prevent vitiligo?
Unfortunately, there are no proven effective measures to prevent vitiligo. Although dogma related to many theories, ayurvedics, vitamin supplements, and alternative medicine has been endorsed by many vitiligo support groups, these are not based on scientific evidence. Aggressive treatment may help in halting the progression of a rapidly progressive disease.
What is the outcome for vitiligo?
The clinical course of generalised vitiligo is highly unpredictable.
In general, vitiligo progresses slowly and gradually over months, then remains quiescent for years, and is usually difficult to control.
Spontaneous repigmentation may occur after exposure to sun, mainly in younger individuals, but this is unpredictable and is usually incomplete. This usually starts as brown spots arising around the hair follicles (perifollicular), usually darker than the normal skin colour, where the overall size of the white patch may get smaller.
Vitiligo can extend further, either by the appearance of new spots, or by peripheral enlargement of pre-existing ones.
Cycles of pigment loss followed by periods of stability may continue indefinitely.
Poor prognostic indicators include longstanding disease, leukotrichia, mucosal involvement, and Koebner phenomenon.
Abdel-Malek ZA, Jordan C, Ho T, Upadhyay PR, Fleischer A, Hamzavi I. The enigma and challenges of vitiligo pathophysiology and treatment. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2020;33(6):778–87. Journal
Bergqvist C, Ezzedine K. Vitiligo: A focus on pathogenesis and its therapeutic implications. J Dermatol. 2021;48(3):252-270. doi:10.1111/1346-8138.15743. Journal
Eleftheriadou V, Atkar R, Batchelor J, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of people with vitiligo 2021. Br J Dermatol. 2022;186(1):18–29. Journal
El-Domyati M, El-Din WH, Rezk AF, et al. Systemic CXCL10 is a predictive biomarker of vitiligo lesional skin infiltration, PUVA, NB-UVB and corticosteroid treatment response and outcome. Arch Dermatol Res. 2022;314(3):275–84. doi:10.1007/s00403-021-02228-9. Journal
Picardo M, Dell'Anna ML, Ezzedine K, et al. Vitiligo. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015;1:15011. Published 2015 Jun 4. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2015.11. Journal
Teulings HE, Overkamp M, Ceylan E, et al. Decreased risk of melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer in patients with vitiligo: a survey among 1307 patients and their partners. Br J Dermatol. 2013;168(1):162–71. Journal
van Geel N, Passeron T, Wolkerstorfer A, Speeckaert R, Ezzedine K. Reliability and validity of the Vitiligo Signs of Activity Score (VSAS). Br J Dermatol. 2020;183(5):883–90. doi:10.1111/bjd.18950. Journal
Weng YC, Ho HJ, Chang YL, Chang YT, Wu CY, Chen YJ. Reduced risk of skin cancer and internal malignancies in vitiligo patients: a retrospective population-based cohort study in Taiwan. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):20195. Published 2021 Oct 12. doi:10.1038/s41598-021-99786-9. Journal
Depigmentation therapy for vitiligo
Hair and skin colour
Pigmentation disorders
Alezzandrini syndrome
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1
Drug-induced vitiligo
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Global Vitiligo Foundation
Vitiligo Association of Australia
American Vitiligo Research Foundation
The Vitiligo Society
Camouflage for patients with vitiligo — Review article in Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, January 2012
National Vitiligo Foundation Inc.
Vitiligo Support International
Association Francaise de Vitiligo
Schweizerische Psoriasis und Vitiligo Gesellschaft
Vitiligo: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Vitiligo — American Academy of Dermatology
Vitiligo — British Association of Dermatologists
Vitiligo International Patient Organizations Committee (VIPOC) - Searchable patient support groups
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urticaria]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urticaria]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Seborrhoeic Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/seborrhoeic-dermatitis]
Seborrheic dermatitis: Causes and treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis — extra information
Dandruff, Seborrheic eczema, Scurf, Pityriasis capitis, Pityriasis simplex capilliti
L21, L21.0, L21.1, L21.8
EA81.Z, 1C62.1, 9A06.71, EA81.1, EA81.0, EA81.Y, EA40.0, EA40.00, EA40.01, EA40.02, EA87.2, 1C62.1
50563003, 156329007, 200776003, 25847004, 402206006, 62742006, 400201008, 231797007, 111188005, 238565002, 238566001, 40221009
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Author: Dr Nusrat Gaffoor Bholah, Department of Dermatology Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, March 2022; A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, October 2017; further minor update July 2024.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is a common, chronic, or relapsing form of eczema/dermatitis that mainly affects the sebaceous gland-rich regions of the scalp, face, and trunk.
There are infantile and adult forms of seborrhoeic dermatitis. This benign inflammatory condition is sometimes associated with psoriasis and is known as sebopsoriasis. Seborrhoeic dermatitis is also known as seborrhoeic eczema (“seborrheic” in American English).
Dandruff (also called ‘pityriasis capitis’) is an uninflamed form of seborrhoeic dermatitis on the scalp. Dandruff presents as diffuse bran-like scaly patches within hair-bearing areas of the scalp without underlying erythema. Dandruff may be asymptomatic or mildly pruritic.
Seborrhoeic blepharitis and dermatitis on the cheeks Scale and erythema due to seborrhoeic dermattis on the glabella and brows Flexural seborrhoeic dermatitis in the axilla Confluent erythema and scale due to scalp seborrhoeic dermatitis Presternal seborrhoeic dermatitis and pityrosporum folliculitis Pigmented paranasal seborrhoeic dermatitis in skin of colour
Who gets seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is a common skin condition affecting 3% to 12% of the population.
It has a biphasic incidence occurring in infants and in adolescents and adults.
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis affects babies under the age of 3 months and usually resolves by 6-12 months of age.
Adult seborrhoeic dermatitis tends to begin in late adolescence. Prevalence is greatest in young adults and in older people. It is more common in males than in females.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis often occurs in otherwise healthy patients. However, the following factors are sometimes associated with severe adult seborrhoeic dermatitis:
Oily skin (seborrhea)
Familial tendency to seborrhoeic dermatitis or a family history of psoriasis
Immunosuppression: organ transplant recipients, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and patients with lymphoma
Neurological and psychiatric diseases: Parkinson’s disease, tardive dyskinesia, depression, epilepsy, facial nerve palsy, spinal cord injury, and congenital disorders such as Down syndrome
Use of neuroleptic medications
Treatment for psoriasis with psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy
Lack of sleep, and stressful events.
What causes seborrhoeic dermatitis?
The aetiology is not completely understood.
Several factors are associated with the condition e.g. hormone levels, fungal infections, nutritional deficits, neurogenic factors. Proliferation of Malassezia yeast genus is believed to play a role. The lipases and phospholipases produced by Malassezia, a saprophyte of normal skin, cleave free fatty acids from triglycerides present in sebum. This may induce inflammation. Differences in skin barrier lipid content and function may account for individual presentations.
What are the clinical features of seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis causes cradle cap (diffuse, greasy scaling on the scalp). The rash may spread to affect armpit and groin folds (a type of napkin dermatitis).
There are salmon-pink patches that may flake or peel.
It is not especially itchy, so the baby often appears undisturbed by the rash, even when generalised.
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis - note eczema in the napkin area and axillae and crade cap Thick yellow scale in crade cap Inflammatory infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis – note lesions in the body folds
Adult seborrhoeic dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis commonly affects areas of the skin with high sebum production, such as the scalp, nasolabial folds, glabella, eyebrows, beard, ears, retroauricular skin, sternum, and other skin folds.
Typical features include:
Winter flares, improving in summer following sun exposure
Minimal itch most of the time
Combination oily and dry mid-facial skin
Ill-defined localised scaly patches or diffuse scale in the scalp
Blepharitis: scaly red eyelid margins
Salmon-pink, thin, scaly, and ill-defined plaques in skin folds on both sides of the face
Petal or ring-shaped flaky patches on the hairline and on anterior chest
Rash in the armpits, under the breasts, in the groin folds, and genital creases
Malassezia folliculitis (inflamed hair follicles) on the cheeks and upper trunk.
Extensive seborrheic dermatitis affecting the scalp, neck, and trunk is sometimes called pityriasiform seborrhoeide.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Seborrheic dermatitis is very common among patients of darker skin types. Studies have shown that it is among the five most common diagnoses observed in black patients.
People of darker skin may present with scaly hypopigmented macules and patches in typical areas of involvement. Arcuate or petal-like patches may be seen, termed petaloid seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Children of colour often do not experience the classic cradle cap appearance of seborrheic dermatitis, but instead have erythema, flaking, and hypopigmentation of the affected areas and folds of skin.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis around the hair line and forehead in skin of colour
What are the complications of seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Secondary bacterial or fungal infection
Skin thinning, dilated blood vessels, and steroid-induced telangiectasia
Psychosocial impact due to appearance of skin
How is seborrhoeic dermatitis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of seborrhoeic dermatitis is a clinical diagnosis based on the location, appearance, and behaviour of the lesions.
If the diagnosis is uncertain, a biopsy can be undertaken. This would typically show parakeratosis in the epidermis, plugged follicular ostia, and spongiosis in the case of seborrhoeic dermatitis. The dermis typically has a sparse, perivascular, lymphohistiocytic inflammatory infiltrate.
As Malassezia are a normal component of skin flora, their presence on microscopy of skin scrapings is not diagnostic.
For information on trichoscopic (dermoscopy) findings in seborrhoeic dermatitis, see trichoscopy of inflammatory conditions.
What is the differential diagnosis for seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Atopic dermatitis/eczema
Lichen simplex chronicus
Nummular dermatitis/eczema
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Tinea capitis, corporis.
What is the treatment for seborrhoeic dermatitis?
Identifying modifiable lifestyle factors e.g. a high fruit intake is associated with less seborrheic dermatitis whereas stress may precipitate flare-ups.
Treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis often involves several of the following options.
Keratolytics: used to remove scale when necessary, e.g. salicylic acid, lactic acid, urea, propylene glycol.
Topical antifungal agents: applied to reduce Malassezia e.g. ketoconazole, or ciclopirox shampoo and/or cream. Note, some strains of Malassezia are resistant to azole antifungals. Try zinc pyrithione or selenium sulphide.
Mild topical corticosteroids: for 1–3 weeks to reduce the inflammation of an acute flare.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors: (pimecrolimus cream, tacrolimus ointment) are indicated if topical corticosteroids are needing to be used frequently, as they have fewer adverse effects on facial skin with long term use.
Roflumilast 0.3% foam has had recent FDA approval for the use of seborrhoeic dermatitis in patients aged 9 years and older.
Medicated shampoos containing ketoconazole, ciclopirox, selenium sulfide, zinc pyrithione, coal tar, and salicylic acid, used twice weekly for at least a month and if necessary, indefinitely.
Steroid scalp applications reduce itching and should be applied daily for a few days every so often.
Calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus can be used as steroid alternatives.
Coal tar cream can be applied to scaling areas and removed several hours later by shampooing.
Combination therapy is often advisable.
Alternative treatments, such as tea tree oil shampoo, may be used.
Face, ears, chest, and back
Cleanse the affected skin thoroughly once or twice each day using a non-soap cleanser.
Apply ketoconazole or ciclopirox cream once daily for 2 to 4 weeks, repeated as necessary.
Hydrocortisone cream can also be used, applied up to twice daily for 1 or 2 weeks. Occasionally a more potent topical steroid may be prescribed.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors such as pimecrolimus cream or tacrolimus ointment may be used instead of topical steroids.
A variety of herbal remedies are commonly used, but their efficacy is uncertain.
Management in infants
Regular washing of the scalp with baby shampoo or aqueous cream is followed by gentle brushing to clear the scales.
White petrolatum may be useful.
Topical antifungal agents are often prescribed, depending on the extent of the rash.
For more information, see infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis.
What is the outcome for seborrhoeic dermatitis?
While seborrhoeic dermatitis may be self-limiting, it may take a long period of time to resolve. Cradle cap in infants usually takes a few weeks or months to disappear. In adults, the condition is frequently chronic and long-term maintenance treatment is often necessary.
Barak-Shinar D, Del Río R, Green LJ. Treatment of seborrheic dermatitis using a novel herbal-based cream. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2017;10(4):17–23. PubMed Central
Borda LJ, Wikramanayake TC. Seborrheic dermatitis and dandruff: a comprehensive review. J Clin Investig Dermatol. 2015;3(2):10.13188/2373-1044.1000019. doi:10.13188/2373-1044.1000019. Journal
Cheong WK, Yeung CK, Torsekar RG, et al. Treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis in Asia: a consensus guide. Skin Appendage Disord. 2016;1(4):187–96. doi:10.1159/000444682. Journal
Clark GW, Pope SM, Jaboori KA. Diagnosis and treatment of seborrheic dermatitis. Am Fam Physician. 2015 Feb 1;91(3):185-90. Journal
de Souza Leão Kamamoto C, Sanudo A, Hassun KM, Bagatin E. Low-dose oral isotretinoin for moderate to severe seborrhea and seborrheic dermatitis: a randomized comparative trial. Int J Dermatol. 2017;56(1):80–5. doi:10.1111/ijd.13408. Journal
Elgash M, Dlova N, Ogunleye T, Taylor SC. Seborrheic Dermatitis in Skin of Color: Clinical Considerations. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019 Jan 1;18(1):24–7. Journal
Sanders MGH, Pardo LM, Ginger RS, Kiefte-de Jong JC, Nijsten T. Association between Diet and Seborrheic Dermatitis: A Cross-Sectional Study. J Invest Dermatol. 2019 Jan;139(1):108–14. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.07.027. Journal
Schwartz RA, Janusz CA and Janniger CK. Seborrheic dermatitis: An overview. Am Fam Physician. 2006 Jul 1;74(1):125–32. Journal
Diagnosis of scalp rashes
Pityriasiform seborrhoeide
Pityriasis versicolor
Malassezia folliculitis
Pityriasis amiantacea
Trichoscopy of inflammatory conditions
Seborrheic dermatitis — National Eczema Society
Seborrhoeic dermatitis — British Association of Dermatologists
Seborrheic dermatitis — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Contact Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/contact-dermatitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
L25, L25.9, L23.9, L24.9
EK0Z, EK1Y, EK00.Z, EK02.Z, EK5Y, NE2Z, EK11
40275004, 238575004, 724869008, 110979008, 762387004, 735469001
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2012.
Blisters that are small (vesicles) or large (bullae)
Lichenification (thickened, lined skin)
Pigmentation increased (hyperpigmentation) or reduced (hypopigmentation).
Secondary changes may include:
Scratch marks (excoriation)
Crusting (due to ooze)
Pustules (due to bacterial infection).
The rash is eczematous (surface skin changes such as blistering, dryness, peeling and redness)
Avoid soap – use a pH-balanced cleanser suitable for sensitive skin
For treating and preventing hand dermatitis, wear appropriate gloves to protect against friction, detergents, soil, plants, paints, diesel etc.
Dry skin carefully after washing
The rash can be treated with a short course of topical corticosteroid creams. Apply emollients frequently while the rash is active and for some weeks afterwards as the normal skin barrier function is restored.
Plants that cause skin problems
Computer mouse dermatitis
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Blistering skin conditions
Emollients and moisturisers
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pityriasis Rosea]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pityriasis-rosea]
Pityriasis rosea - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pityriasis rosea — extra information
Pityriasis circinata et maculata
Last Reviewed: December, 2021
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated August 2014. Updated: Dr Nicole Seebacher, Department of Oncology, Oxford, United Kingdom. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. December 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is pityriasis rosea?
The herald patch is followed some time later, typically two weeks or so, by the development of smaller scaly oval red patches, resembling a Christmas tree, distributed mainly on the chest and back.
Who gets pityriasis rosea?
Pityriasis rosea is most common in teenagers and young adults (10–35 year-olds), however it can affect people of any age
Occurs very slightly more often in women
Approximate incidence of 0.5% to 2%
May be more common in spring and autumn
What causes pityriasis rosea?
The exact cause is not known. Viral, bacterial, and non-infective causes have been hypothesised.
Reports suggested pityriasis rosea may be caused by:
Herpesviruses 6 and 7 (HHV-6/7) have the strongest known association, however studies have not been confirmatory.
Other viral infections, such as H1N1 influenza A and COVID-19, may also be causative.
Drug-induced reactions
Many drugs have been associated, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, hydrochlorothiazide, gold, captopril, atypical antipsychotics barbiturates, D-penicillamine, imatinib, metronidazole, isotretinoin, clozapine, and clonidine.
Pityriasis rosea may be triggered by the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG), H1N1, diphtheria, smallpox, hepatitis B, Pneumococcus, and COVID-19 vaccines.
What are the clinical features of pityriasis rosea?
Except for mild to severe itching in up to 25% of patients, no systemic symptoms are typically present during the rash phase of pityriasis rosea. A few days before the rash develops, up to 69% have flu-like symptoms eg, cough or sore throat.
The herald patch is a single patch that appears before the generalised rash of pityriasis rosea. It is a slightly raised, oval, salmon-pink or red plaque 2–5 cm in diameter, with a peripheral scale trailing just inside the edge of the lesion, like a collaret.
Pityriasis rosea and a herald patch on the torso A hypopigmented herald patch Flexural pityriasis rosea and a herald patch in the axilla
A few days to a few weeks later after the appearance of the herald patch, more scaly patches or plaques appear on the chest and back, most often appearing from the top down. A few plaques may also appear on the thighs, upper arms, and neck, but are uncommon on the face, scalp, palms, or soles.
These secondary lesions tend to be smaller than the herald patch. They are also oval in shape with a dry surface and the long axis of the oval lesion is often orientated around the ribs. Like the herald patch, they may have an inner collaret of scaling. Some plaques may be annular.
Pityriasis rosea patches and plaques usually follow the relaxed skin tension lines or cleavage lines (Langer lines) on both sides of the upper trunk. The rash has been described as looking like a Christmas tree in distribution. Worsening of the rash or a second wave of lesions is not uncommon before eventual spontaneous resolution of the eruption. In children the distribution and lesions are often atypical.
Pityriasis rosea on the trunk Oval scaly patches in pityriasis rosea on the trunk Hypopigmented pityriasis rosea in skin of colour
Atypical pityriasis rosea
Pityriasis rosea is said to be atypical when diagnosis has been difficult. Atypical pityriasis rosea may be diagnosed when the rash has features such as:
Atypical morphology, eg papules, vesicles, urticated plaques, purpuric, or target lesions (erythema multiforme-like)
Large size or confluent plaques
Unusual distribution of skin lesions, for example an inverse pattern, with prominent involvement of the skin folds (armpits and groin), or involvement of the limbs but the trunk is spared
Involvement of mucosal sites, eg, mouth ulceration
Solitary herald patch without generalised rash
Multiple herald patches
Absence of herald patch
A large number of patches
A prolonged course of the disease
Multiple recurrences.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The pityriasis rosea rash often leaves behind patches of lighter (hypopigmented) or darker (hyperpigmented) discolouration. This may be more obvious in darker-skinned people and may take months to return to normal appearance.
What are the complications of pityriasis rosea?
Premature delivery and foetal demise during pregnancy, within the first 15 weeks of gestation
A severe cutaneous adverse reaction (drug hypersensitivity syndrome) due to reactivation of herpes 6/7 in association with a drug
Prolonged skin discolouration.
How is pityriasis rosea diagnosed?
Identification can be challenging at the onset of symptoms. There are no non-invasive tests that confirm the condition. The diagnosis is usually made clinically but may be supported by:
Histology — subacute dermatitis is seen on histology
Eosinophils are typical of drug-induced pityriasis rosea.
Blood testing for HHV6 (IgG or PCR) is not indicated because nearly 100% of individuals have been infected with the virus in childhood and commercial tests do not currently measure HHV6 activity.
If the diagnosis is uncertain, especially if the palms and soles are affected, it is important to consider the possibility of other conditions.
Table 1. Proposed diagnostic criteria for pityriasis rosea
Discrete circular or oval lesions
Scaling on most lesions
Peripheral collarette scaling with central clearance on at least two lesions
Optional (At least one of the following features)
Truncal and proximal limb distribution ( 10% of lesions distal to mid-upper-arm and mid-thigh)
Most lesions along skin cleavage lines
Herald patch ≥ 2 days before other lesions
Multiple small vesicles at the centre of ≥ 2 lesions
≥ 2 lesions on palmar or plantar skin surfaces
Source: Zawar V, Chuh A. Applicability of proposed diagnostic criteria of pityriasis rosea:
results of a prospective case-control study in India. Indian J Dermatol. Nov 2013
What is the differential diagnosis for pityriasis rosea?
Pityriasis rubra pilaris
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
What is the treatment for pityriasis rosea?
While pityriasis rosea is a self-limiting disease, an important goal of treatment is to control pruritus, which may be severe in 25% of patients. In addition to education and reassurance, many patients will benefit from:
Applying moisturising creams to dry skin
Bathing or showering with plain water and bath oil, aqueous cream, or another soap substitute
Exposing skin to sunlight cautiously (without burning).
The following therapies may help with the symptoms and speed up clearance:
Medium potency topical steroid creams/ointments and oral antihistamines may reduce the itch while waiting for the rash to resolve.
For patients with severe itching, treatment with zinc oxide, calamine lotion, and even oral steroids may be helpful. Routine use of oral steroids is not recommended due to risk for relapse after treatment and limited evidence.
Macrolide antibiotics were once advocated, but do not appear to be beneficial.
What is the outcome for pityriasis rosea?
Recurrence of pityriasis rosea outside the acute phase is rare (1–3%), perhaps adding weight to the suggestion that there is long-lasting immunity after a proposed infection. However, a different viral infection may trigger recurrence years later.
Drago F, Ranieri E, Malaguti F, Battifoglio ML, Losi E, Rebora A. Human herpesvirus 7 in patients with pityriasis rosea. Electron microscopy investigations and polymerase chain reaction in mononuclear cells, plasma and skin. Dermatol. 1997;195(4):374–8. doi:10.1159/000245991. Journal
Drago F, Ciccarese G, Rebora A, Parodi A. Human herpesvirus-6, -7, and Epstein-Barr virus reactivation in pityriasis rosea during COVID-19. J Med Virol. 2021;93(4):1850–1. doi:10.1002/jmv.26549. Journal
Drago F, Ciccarese G, Herzum A, Rebora A, Parodi A. Pityriasis Rosea during Pregnancy: Major and Minor Alarming Signs. Dermatology. 2018;234(1-2):31–6. doi:10.1159/000489879. Journal
Drago F, Ciccarese G, Rebora A, Parodi A. The efficacy of macrolides and acyclovir in pityriasis rosea. Ind J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. Jan-Feb 2015;81(1):56. doi:10.4103/0378-6323.148572. Journal
Drago F, Broccolo F, Javor S, Drago F, Rebora A, Parodi A. Evidence of human herpesvirus-6 and -7 reactivation in miscarrying women with pityriasis rosea. J Am Acad Dermatol. Jul 2014;71(1):198–9. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.02.023. Journal
Ganguly S. A Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled Study of Efficacy of Oral Acyclovir in the Treatment of Pityriasis Rosea. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8(5):Yc01-4. doi:10.7860/jcdr/2014/8140.4360. Journal
Jairath V, Mohan M, Jindal N, et al. Narrowband UVB phototherapy in pityriasis rosea. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2015;6(5):326–9. doi:10.4103/2229-5178.164480. Journal
Rodriguez-Zuniga M, Torres N, Garcia-Perdomo H. Effectiveness of acyclovir in the treatment of pityriasis rosea. A systematic review and meta-analysis. An Bras Dermatol. Sep-Oct 2018;93(5):686–95. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20187252. Journal
Zawar V, Chuh A. Applicability of proposed diagnostic criteria of pityriasis rosea: results of a prospective case-control study in India. Ind J Dermatol. Nov 2013;58(6):439–42. doi:10.4103/0019-5154.119950 Journal
Spotlight on Red Scaly Rashes — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Pityriasis rosea — British Association of Dermatologists
Patient information: Pityriasis rosea (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Pityriasis rosea — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lichen Planus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lichen-planus]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lichen planus — extra information
Ruber planus, Lichen ruber planus
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
L43, L43.0, L443.1, L43.8, L43.9
EA91.Z, EA91.1, EA91.3, EA91.40, EA91.41, EA91.5, EA91.Y
4776004, 402348002, 235049008, 44509000, 238668006, 238647005, 200999007, 238658001, 6111009, 238666005, 717061002, 238662007, 68266006, 707249009, 238651007, 238659009
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author(s): Dr Jacqueline Chen, General Practitioner, Australia (2022); Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (2015); minor update by Dr Jing Liu, Resident Medical Officer, Australia (2023)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson (2023)
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is lichen planus?
Lichen planus (LP) is a chronic inflammatory condition affecting the skin and mucosal surfaces. There are several clinical types:
Cutaneous lichen planus
Mucosal lichen planus
Lichen planus of the nails
Lichen planus pigmentosus
Lichenoid drug eruption.
Who gets lichen planus?
Lichen planus affects approximately 1% of the population worldwide, mostly affecting adults aged between 30 to 60 years. It has no strong racial predilection.
Approximately 10% of those affected have lichen planus of the nails while half of those affected have oral lichen planus, which is more common in women than in men.
What causes lichen planus?
Lichen planus is a T-cell mediated autoimmune disorder in which inflammatory cells attack an unknown protein within the skin and basal keratinocytes.
Contributing factors to lichen planus may include:
Genetic predisposition
Physical and emotional stress
Injury to the skin; lichen planus often appears where the skin has been scratched or after surgery (koebnerisation)
Localised skin disease such as herpes zoster
Systemic viral infection, such as hepatitis C (which might modify self-antigens on the surface of basal keratinocytes)
Drugs; gold, quinine, quinidine, and others can cause a lichenoid rash.
Lichenoid inflammation is also notable in graft-versus-host disease.
Vitamin D deficiency may be associated with oral lichen planus. Its association with other types of LP remains unexplored.
What are the clinical features of lichen planus?
Lichen planus may cause a small number or many lesions on the skin and mucosal surfaces.
Cutaneous lichen planus
The usual presentation of the disease is classical lichen planus. Symptoms can range from none (uncommon) to intense itch.
Papules and polygonal plaques are shiny, flat-topped, and firm on palpation.
The plaques are crossed by fine white lines called Wickham striae.
Hypertrophic lichen planus can be a scaly and pruritic rash.
Atrophic lichen planus is a rare annular variant with an atrophic centre.
Annular lichen planus describes the development of violaceous plaques with central clearing often involving penis, scrotum, and intertriginous areas.
Size ranges from pinpoint to larger than a centimetre.
Distribution may be scattered, clustered, linear, annular, or actinic (sun-exposed sites such as face, neck, and backs of the hands).
Location can be anywhere, but most often front of the wrists, lower back, and ankles.
Colour depends on the patient’s skin type. New papules and plaques often have a purple or violet hue, except on palms and soles where they are yellowish-brown.
Plaques resolve after some months to leave greyish-brown post-inflammatory macules that can take a year or longer to fade.
Papular lichen planus coalescing into plaques on the wrist (PLP-patient1)Flat topped, shiny, polygonal papules of lichen planus on the volar wrist (PLP-patient1)A plaque of lichen planus showing Wickham striae Papular lichen planus with Koebner phenomenum in skin of colour Lichen planus over the ankle and heel Papular lichen planus with a linear Koebner lesion due to a scratch
The mouth is often the only affected area and often involves the inside of the cheeks and the sides of the tongue, but the gums and lips may also be involved.
The most common patterns are:
Painless white streaks in a lacy or fern-like pattern (Wickham striae)
Painful and persistent erosions and ulcers (erosive LP)
Diffuse redness and peeling of the gums (desquamative gingivitis)
Localised inflammation of the gums adjacent to amalgam fillings.
Reticulate buccal mucosal lichen planus Lacy reticulated lichen planus covering the entire tongue Erosive lichen planus on the lateral border of the tongue Reticulate and violaceous lichen planus on the lower lip Reticulate and eroded lichen planus on the lower lip
Vulval lichen planus
Lichen planus may affect the labia majora, labia minora, and vaginal introitus. Presentation includes:
Painless white streaks in a lacy or fern-like pattern
Painful and persistent erosions and ulcers (erosive LP)
Scarring, resulting in adhesions, resorption of labia minora and introital stenosis
Overlap with vulval lichen sclerosus that most commonly affects women over 50 years of age.
Penile lichen planus
Classical papules in a ring around the glans.
White streaks and erosive lichen planus may occur but are less common.
Erosive lichen planus uncommonly affects the lacrimal glands, eyelids, external ear canal, oesophagus, larynx, bladder, and anus.
Lichen planopilaris presents as tiny red spiny follicular papules and extending smooth areas on the scalp or less often, elsewhere on the body. Rarely, blistering occurs in the lesions. Destruction of the hair follicles leads to permanently bald patches characterised by sparse 'lonely hairs'.
Frontal fibrosing alopecia is a form of lichen planopilaris that affects the anterior scalp, forehead, and eyebrows.
Pseudopelade of Brocq may be a variant of lichen planus without inflammation or scaling. Areas of scarring without hair slowly appear, described as looking 'like footprints in the snow'.
Lichen planus affects one or more nails, sometimes without involving the skin.
It is called twenty-nail dystrophy if all nails are abnormal and nowhere else is affected.
Lichen planus thins the nail plate, which may become grooved and ridged.
The nail may darken, thicken or lift off the nail bed (onycholysis).
Sometimes the cuticle is destroyed and forms a scar (pterygium).
The nails may shed or stop growing altogether, and rarely, completely disappear (anonychia).
Complete nail plate destruction due to lichen planus Ridging and roughness (onychorrhexis) of the finger nail plates due to nail unit lichen planus Nail plate atrophy and destruction and pterygium development in nail unit lichen planus. Lichen planus is evident over the adjacent distal phalanx
Lichen planus pigmentosus
Characterised by ill-defined oval, greyish brown marks on the face and neck or trunk and limbs without an inflammatory phase.
It is a form of acquired dermal macular hyperpigmentation.
Can be provoked by sun exposure, but it can also arise in sun-protected sites such as the armpits.
Diffuse, reticulate, and diffuse patterns.
Similar to erythema dyschromicum perstans and might be the same disease.
Rarely affects the lips, resulting in a patchy dark pigmentation on upper and lower lips.
Lichen planus pigmentosus of face Lichen planus pigmentosus of lower back Lichen planus pigmentosus of lower lip
Lichen planus actinicus (LPA)
Other names include lichen planus subtropicus, lichen planus tropicus, lichenoid melanodermatitis, and summertime actinic lichenoid eruptions.
Mainly occurs in young adults of Middle Eastern, East African, or Indian descent.
Appears to be triggered by sunlight exposure (ie, photosensitive).
Involve sun-exposed area such as the forehead, cheeks, lips, neck, back of the hands, and forearms
Worsen in summer and improve in winter
Appear as red-brown annular plaques, or hyperpigmented patches.
Lesions typically do not:
Involve the mucous membranes
Display the Koebner phenomenon.
Photosensitive lesions that appear whitish (dyschromic) pinhead and papules are called actinic lichen nitidus, which is now considered a separate and distinct entity from LPA.
LPA is usually diagnosed based on lesion distribution and skin biopsy results.
Lichenoid drug eruption
Lichenoid drug eruption refers to a lichen planus-like rash caused by medications.
Asymptomatic or itchy; pink, brown, or purple; flat, slightly scaly patches most often arise on the trunk. The oral mucosa (oral lichenoid reaction) and other sites are also sometimes affected.
Many drugs can rarely cause lichenoid eruptions. The most common are:
Quinine and thiazide diuretics cause a photosensitive lichenoid drug eruption.
Bullous lichen planus and lichen planus pemphigoides
Bullous lichen planus
Produces blisters due to destruction of basal keratinocytes, and is rare.
Lichen planus pemphigoides
Rare combination of lichen planus and bullous pemphigoid.
Destruction of the basal keratinocytes exposes bullous pemphigoid antigen at the dermoepidermal junction (termed epitope spreading), followed by the development of circulating antibodies against BP antigen.
Erythema and blisters develop both at the sites of and distant from lesions of lichen planus.
Severe lichen planus on the foot producing blisters (BLP-patient1)
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Hypertrophic, actinic variants, lichen planus pigmentosus, and residual post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation are more common amongst darker-skinned individuals.
What are the complications of lichen planus?
Hypertrophic lichen planus may resemble squamous cell carcinoma. However, rarely, longstanding erosive lichen planus can result in true squamous cell carcinoma, most often in the mouth, vulva, or penis. This should be suspected if there is an enlarging nodule or an ulcer with thickened edges.
Cancer is more common in smokers, those with a history of cancer in mucosal sites, and those who carry sexually acquired and oncogenic human papillomavirus.
Oesophageal lichen planus can cause dysphagia, strictures, and possibly squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer from other forms of lichen planus is rare.
How is lichen planus diagnosed?
Typical features include:
Irregularly thickened epidermis
Wedge-shaped hypergranulosis, ‘saw-tooth’ shaped rete ridges
Civatte bodies (apoptotic keratinocytes) in the lower epidermis and upper dermis
Liquefaction degeneration of the basal layer of the epidermis
Band-like lymphocytic infiltrate at the dermo-epidermal junction.
Direct immunofluorescence studies are not routinely needed. Results may reveal colloid bodies in the papillary dermis with irregular deposits.
What is the differential diagnosis for lichen planus?
Differential diagnoses of lichen planus are broad and can be categorised into:
Table 1: Differential diagnoses for lichen planus
Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Lichen simplex chronicus
Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevus (ILVEN)
Linear Darier-White disease
Lichenoid cutaneous amyloidosis
Lichen planus pigmentosus
Lichen planus actinicus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Polymorphous light eruption
Erythema dyschromicum perstans (ashy dermatosis)
Lichenoid drug eruption
Lichen planus pemphigoides
Vulval lichen planus
Vulvovaginal blistering diseases
Squamous cell cancer
Lichen planus of nails
What is the treatment for lichen planus?
Avoid soaps and shower gels that will exacerbate scaling.
Use emollients regularly.
Sedating antihistamines may help troublesome nocturnal itch.
Treatment is not always necessary as cutaneous LP can be self-limiting and treatment goals are to manage pruritus. Local treatments for the symptomatic cutaneous or mucosal disease are:
Potent topical corticosteroids (including steroid impregnated tape)
Topical calcineurin inhibitors, tacrolimus ointment, and pimecrolimus cream
Intralesional steroid injections.
Systemic treatment for widespread lichen planus or severe local disease often includes a 1- to 3-month course of systemic steroids (eg, prednisone), while commencing another agent from the following list:
Mycophenolate mofetil
Anecdotal success is reported from long courses of antibiotics e.g. metronidazole, sulfasalazine, antifungals (such as griseofulvin), and JAK inhibitors. Lichen planopilaris is reported to improve with pioglitazone and tetracyclines.
In lichen planus actinicus, phototherapy should be avoided because lesions are typically triggered by sun exposure. Sun protection, including use of sunscreen, is an essential component of treatment.
In oral lichen planus, limited evidence is found in using apremilast. Successful treatment of oral and cutaneous lichen planus with adalimumab has previously been reported. Tildrakizumab has been shown to demonstrate positive results in erosive oral lichen planus in an isolated case study.
For more information see, oral lichen planus and erosive lichen planus.
What is the outcome for lichen planus?
Lichen planus can have a chronic remitting and relapsing course. Cutaneous lichen planus tends to clear within a couple of years in most people, but post-inflammatory pigmentation may take years to subside.
Mucosal lichen planus is more likely to persist for a decade or longer. For lichen planopilaris, scarring is permanent, including scarring alopecia. Lichenoid drug eruption resolves slowly when the responsible medication is withdrawn.
Le Cleach L, Chosidow O. Clinical practice. Lichen planus. N Engl J Med. 2012; 23;366(8):723–32. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp1103641. Journal
Gorouhi F, Davari P, Fazel N. Cutaneous and mucosal lichen planus: A comprehensive Review of clinical subtypes, risk factors, diagnosis and prognosis. Sci World J. 2014; 1–22. Journal
Damsky W, Wang A, Olamiju B, Peterson D, Galan A, King B. Treatment of severe lichen planus with the JAK inhibitor tofacitinib. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145(6):1708–10.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.01.031. Journal
Ismail FF, Sinclair R. Clinical healing of erosive oral lichen planus with tildrakizumab implicates the interleukin-23/interleukin-17 pathway in the pathogenesis of lichen planus. Australas J Dermatol. 2020;61(2):244–5. doi: 10.1111/ajd.13183. Journal
Motahari P, Pournaghi Azar F, Rasi A. Role of Vitamin D and Vitamin D Receptor in Oral Lichen Planus: A Systematic Review. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2020;30(4):615–622. doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v30i4.17. Article
Weston G, Payette M. Update on lichen planus and its clinical variants. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2015;1(3):140–149. doi: 10.1016/j.ijwd.2015.04.001. Journal
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lichenoid drug eruption
Erosive lichen planus
Genital skin problems
Direct immunofluorescence
Acquired dermal macular hyperpigmentation
Spotlight on Red Scaly Rashes — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Lichen planus — The Australian College of Dermatologists
Lichen planus — The Royal Women's Hospital, Victoria, Australia
Steroid impregnated tape — YouTube: demonstrating tape application
Vulvovaginal Disorders: A Pathway to Diagnosis and Treatment
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Alopecia Areata]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/alopecia-areata]
Alopecia Areata: Causes, Diagnosis, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Alopecia areata — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
L63, L63.0, L63.1, L63.2, L63.8, L63.9
ED70.2, ED70.20, ED70.21, ED70.2Y, ED70.2Z
68225006, 19754005, 46586006, 5860029, 86166000
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author(s): Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, 1997; Updated: Dr Harriet Bell, Medical Registrar, New Zealand, May 2022. Minor update by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2024
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is alopecia areata?
Alopecia areata is an autoimmune condition affecting hair follicles causing hair loss. It typically presents with discrete bald patches on the scalp but can cause hair loss from all hair-bearing areas on the body.
Alopecia is a Latin term meaning hair loss, and areata refers to the patchy nature of the hair loss. The term alopecia areata is considered an umbrella term, which encompasses a number of variants including alopecia areata totalis or universalis, ophiasis, ophiasis inversus, and diffuse alopecia areata.
A single patch of alopecia areata (AA-patient1)Extensive patchy alopecia areata Alopecia totalis Ophiasic pattern alopecia areata (AA-patient5)Extensive alopecia areata with retention of grey hairs Dermoscopic image of alopecia areata presenting with exclamation mark hairs
Who gets alopecia areata?
The lifetime risk of alopecia areata is approximately 2%. It affects children and adults of all skin and hair colours. Peak incidence occurs in the second and third decades and most patients experience onset before the fourth decade. Alopecia areata does not carry significant sex or ethnic predominance.
The following may increase the risk of alopecia areata:
Chromosomal disorders such as Down syndrome
Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type 1
Other autoimmune conditions such as vitiligo and thyroid disease
A family history of alopecia areata
Certain susceptibility genes (see below).
What causes alopecia areata?
A normal hair follicle cycles through multiple phases:
Anagen is the active growth phase lasting one to eight years
Catagen is a short involution phase lasting several weeks
Telogen is the resting phase lasting several months
Exogen is the shedding of the hair.
The exact mechanism responsible for hair loss in alopecia areata remains unclear. It is hypothesised that loss of immune privilege in anagen hair follicles plays a key role in the pathogenesis, and genetic susceptibility is also thought to contribute.
Immune privilege hypothesis
Normal anagen hair follicles are thought to exhibit immune privilege, rendering them exempt from immune surveillance and protected against autoimmune attack.
Protective immune privilege may be lost in alopecia areata, allowing hair follicle autoantigens to be presented to autoreactive CD8+ T cells.
Subsequent autoimmune attack of the anagen follicle causes premature transition of the follicle into the telogen phase with ultimate loss of the hair.
This hypothesis is supported by the observation of a dense perifollicular infiltrate of T cells on histopathological examination of anagen follicles in alopecia areata; an area that is normally sparse of immune cells.
Alopecia areata has a strong hereditary component.
At least 16 genetic risk loci have been detected.
Include numerous human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and II alleles, and several alleles of genes involved in immune pathways, hair pigmentation, and response to oxidative stress.
Mode of inheritance appears to be complex, with environmental influences also at play.
What are the clinical features of alopecia areata?
Acute onset of hair loss may manifest in a number of patterns.
Patchy alopecia areata is the most common pattern, producing:
Well-demarcated single or several round/oval patches of normal-appearing skin.
The scalp is most commonly affected, but may also affect the:
Any other hair-bearing areas.
Less common patterns include:
Alopecia totalis – complete loss of scalp hair
Affects up to 5% of patients with autoimmune hair loss
Alopecia universalis – complete loss of body hair
Affects less than 1%
Ophiasis — bandlike hair loss on the occipital and temporal scalp margins
Sisaipho (ophiasis inversus) — hair loss on the frontal, temporal, and parietal scalp which may mimic male pattern hair loss
Diffuse alopecia areata (alopecia areata incognita) — rapid and widespread hair loss.
Sudden greying — loss of pigmented hairs, resulting in the unmasking of existing grey hairs (“white overnight”).
Characteristic “exclamation point hairs” may be observed, particularly at the periphery of bald patches. An exclamation point hair is a broken strand with a relatively thick distal portion and thin proximal portion as it enters the scalp. They are the result of anagen arrest and cessation of hair shaft formation, with weakening and tapering of the shaft.
Some patients may experience localised tingling or itching preceding hair loss (trichodynia).
Upon regrowth, hairs may initially lack pigment and so grow back as white or blonde.
Nail changes can be seen in an estimated 10–40% of patients and tend to be associated with more severe disease.
Nail pitting and ridging are most common.
Other nail features include koilonychia, trachyonychia, Beau’s lines, onychorrhexis, onychomadesis, onycholysis, and red spots in the lunula.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
There are no differences in clinical features of alopecia in patients with skin of colour.
What are the complications of alopecia areata?
Poor health-related quality of life due to distress.
Higher rates of depression and generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorders are also common.
Other autoimmune conditions may be more commonly observed in patients with alopecia areata e.g. thyroid disease, vitiligo, psoriasis, diabetes mellitus, and atopy.
How is alopecia areata diagnosed?
Alopecia areata is typically diagnosed on clinical features, however additional tests may aid diagnosis.
Examination of the hair follicle, hair shaft, and scalp with a dermatoscope
Features of active disease include exclamation point hairs, broken or dystrophic hairs, yellow dots and black dots.
Can help confirm hair loss and is often positive in alopecia areata
Involves grasping 40–60 closely grouped hairs and applying gentle traction
Positive when more than 10% of hairs are easily pulled out.
May be required if diagnosis uncertain
In acute alopecia areata, histopathology reveals a “bee-swarm pattern” of dense lymphocytic infiltrates surrounding anagen hair follicles
Increase in catagen and telogen relative to anagen follicles, and follicle miniaturisation with progression of disease.
How is the severity of alopecia areata assessed?
Scalp alopecia areata is assessed on the basis of the percentage of the scalp that is affected - this is the SALT score.
SALT 0 means there is not hair loss due to alopecia areata.
SALT 50 means 50% of the scalp is affected by alopecia areata. SALT 40 is regarded by sufferers and dermatologists as severe alopecia areata.
Lash and brow alopecia can be difficult to disguise and adds to the burden of the condition.
The ASAMI score (Alopecia Areata Severity and Morbidity Index) has recently been devised to take into account not only sites and extent of alopecia, but sufferer centred symptoms such as difficulty in camouflage, affects on work recreation, relationships, and mental wellbeing.
What is the differential diagnosis for alopecia areata?
Temporal triangular alopecia
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia
Discoid lupus erythematosus affecting the scalp
Telogen effluvium (may mimic diffuse alopecia areata)
Androgenetic alopecia (may mimic sisaipho pattern)
Secondary syphilis (syphilitic alopecia)
Frontal fibrosing alopecia.
What is the treatment for alopecia areata?
There is no cure for alopecia areata. The hair loss in alopecia areata is associated with minimal harmful physical effects and spontaneous resolution may occur.
However, the psychological impact can be significant, therefore warranting treatment. Numerous therapies have been used with variable response and high quality evidence is lacking.
Treatments for mild alopecia areata (less than 50% scalp involvement)
Intralesional corticosteroid injections
Injections of triamcinolone into areas of patchy alopecia of the scalp, beard, or eyebrow have an immunosuppressant effect and may speed up hair regrowth.
Repeated four to six weekly and stopped once regrowth is complete.
Potent corticosteroid solutions, creams, or ointments
Most beneficial if used with occlusive dressings
Ideally in combination with other therapies
Anthralin (dithranol) cream or ointment
Limited use in fair-haired individuals due to brown staining of skin and hair.
Treatments for extensive alopecia areata (greater than 50% scalp involvement, alopecia totalis, or universalis)
Topical immunotherapy
T-cells are theorised to be “distracted” from attacking hair follicles due to antigenic competition.
Severe dermatitis, urticaria, lymphadenopathy, and depigmentation are potential side effects and may limit use.
Systemic corticosteroids
Limited by well-known adverse effects.
Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors
In June 2022, The FDA approved baricitinib use in severe alopecia areata.
Clinical trials are ongoing, but preliminary results also show promise for other JAK inhibitors.
JAK inhibitors block the T-cell-mediated inflammatory response that is thought to be responsible for damage to the hair follicle.
Some oral JAK inhibitors are more effective than topical preparations, and significantly more effective than placebos used in large clinical trials.
Baricitinib has received FDA approval for use in the USA.
Ritlecitinib has received FDA and NICE approval — after 24 weeks, almost a quarter of patients achieved a SALT score of ≤20. The response rate increased to over 40% after one year on therapy.
Deuruxolitinib has received FDA approval for severe alopecia areata in adults.
Brepocitinib may be slightly more effective than ritlecitinib, but in one trial it produced a serious inflammatory condition of skeletal muscles in two recipients.
Long term follow up data, outcomes after drug discontinuation, and long term safely remain to be answered. They may be more effective in those who have not had the disease for several years, and in those who do not have alopecia totalis or universalis. Brow and lash regrowth has been documented. They are expensive medications.
Improvement following numerous other less common and less studied treatments have been reported.
Systemic examples include:
Ezetimibe-simvastatin
Localised examples include:
Platelet-rich plasma
Education and counselling
Patients should be informed that there is no cure and response to treatments are variable.
Alopecia areata may spontaneously resolve, persist, relapse, and/or progress. Explaining the various possible disease courses can help manage expectations.
Some patients may benefit from professional counselling to adjust to the appearance altering aspect of the disorder and regain self-confidence.
Consider patient support groups.
Camouflaging hair loss can be helpful for patients who decide against pharmacological treatment or in those who have incomplete response.
A prosthesis can be used to disguise scalp hair loss.
Options include a full wig, hairpiece (clipped or glued to existing hair), or mesh integration system (custom made unit with hair extensions in the areas of alopecia).
Styling products such as gels, mousses, powders, and sprays help to keep hair in place, achieve scalp coverage, and add volume.
False eyelashes or artificial eyebrows
Eyebrow tattooing or microblading can be helpful.
Waterproof eyebrow pencil or eyeliner is a less permanent option.
How do you prevent alopecia areata?
We do not yet know how to prevent alopecia areata.
What is the outcome for alopecia areata?
Alopecia areata follows an unpredictable course. Spontaneous hair regrowth and recovery may occur and is common in some reports. Relapse is also common, however, and patients may have several phases of hair loss and subsequent regrowth. The risk of progression to alopecia totalis or alopecia universalis is approximately 5–10%, from which recovery is unlikely.
Response to treatment is highly variable and hair loss may recur when therapy is stopped.
Poor prognostic factors include:
Younger age at onset
More extensive disease
Hair loss of greater than one-year duration
Family history of alopecia areata
Presence of atopy or other autoimmune diseases.
ASAMI Consensus Survey Study Group, Moussa A, Bennett M, et al. The Alopecia Areata Severity and Morbidity Index (ASAMI) Study: Results From a Global Expert Consensus Exercise on Determinants of Alopecia Areata Severity. JAMA Dermatol. 2024;160(3):341–50. PubMed
Darwin E, Hirt P, Fertig R, Doliner B, Delcanto G, Jimenez J. Alopecia areata: Review of epidemiology, clinical features, pathogenesis, and new treatment options. Int J Trichol. 2018;10(2):51. doi:10.4103/ijt.ijt_99_17. Journal
Dillon KAL. A Comprehensive Literature Review of JAK Inhibitors in Treatment of Alopecia Areata. CCID. 2021;Volume 14:691–714. doi:10.2147/CCID.S309215. Journal
Gilhar A, Etzioni A, Paus R. Alopecia Areata. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(16):1515–25. doi:10.1056/NEJMra1103442. Journal
Harries MJ, Ascott A, Asfour L, et al. British Association of Dermatologists living guideline for managing people with alopecia areata 2024. Br J Dermatol. 2025;192(2):190-205. doi:10.1093/bjd/ljae385 Journal
Lattouf C, Jimenez JJ, Tosti A, et al. Treatment of alopecia areata with simvastatin/ezetimibe. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(2):359–61. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.11.006. Journal
King B, Guttman-Yassky E, Peeva E, et al. A phase 2a randomized, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the oral Janus kinase inhibitors ritlecitinib and brepocitinib in alopecia areata: 24-week results. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;85(2):379–87. PubMed
King B, Zhang X, Harcha WG, et al. Efficacy and safety of ritlecitinib in adults and adolescents with alopecia areata: a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 2b-3 trial [published correction appears in Lancet. 2023 Jun 10;401(10392):1928]. Lancet. 2023;401(10387):1518–29. PubMed
Messenger AG, McKillop J, Farrant P, et al. British Association of Dermatologists’ guidelines for the management of alopecia areata 2012. British Journal of Dermatology. 2012;166(5):916–26. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10955.x. Journal
Miteva M, Villasante A. Epidemiology and burden of alopecia areata: a systematic review. CCID. Published online July 2015:397. doi:10.2147/CCID.S53985. Review
Rajabi F, Drake LA, Senna MM, Rezaei N. Alopecia areata: a review of disease pathogenesis. Br J Dermatol. 2018;179(5):1033–48. doi:10.1111/bjd.16808. Journal
Strazzulla LC, Wang EHC, Avila L, et al. Alopecia areata. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 2018;78(1):1–12. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2017.04.1141. Journal
Wasserman D, Guzman-Sanchez DA, Scott K, McMichael A. Alopecia areata: Alopecia areata. International Journal of Dermatology. 2007;46(2):121–31. doi:10.1111/j.1365-4632.2007.03193.x. Journal
Zhang Y, Wang F, Li X, et al. Oral abrocitinib for treatment of refractory alopecia areata: A retrospective study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;92(1):153-155. Journal
Alopecia areata in children
Trichoscopy of generalised noncicatricial hair loss
Trichoscopy of localised noncicatricial hair loss
The National Alopecia Areata Foundation
Alopecia New Zealand
Australia Alopecia Areata Foundation
Children's Alopecia Project
Alopecia World support group
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Scabies]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/scabies]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Scabies — extra information
Sarcoptic itch, Infestation by Sarcoptes scabiei var hominis
1G04, 1G04.0, 1G04.1
128869009, 67333007, 128870005, 128873007, 409977006, 47624007, 39552000, 410457007, 387559003
Author: Dr Jessica Rachel Maguire, IMT, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, March 2022; updated by Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, United Kingdom, April 2025.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Scabies is a transmissible skin disease caused by the ectoparasitic mite Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis. This variant infests humans only; scabies cannot be caught or transferred to other animals.
Scabies is a highly contagious infestation of the human epidermis. Scabies was described by Aristotle who likened the disease to ‘lice of the flesh’. Scabies presents as a rash with intense itching; it may have a characteristic appearance and distribution.
The burden of disease is higher in low-income areas, in the tropics, and in poorly resourced communities and countries.
Risk factors for scabies, particularly in developing countries, include:
What causes scabies?
Spread via fomites (clothing, towels, etc.) is very uncommon as the mite perishes within hours of leaving the host; it is relevant in crusted scabies.
The smaller male mite fertilises the female on the surface of the skin and dies shortly after mating.
The female mite burrows into the stratum corneum of the host where they lay 2 to 3 eggs per day.
The female continues to burrow at a rate of 0.5 to 5mm per day for the duration of its 4 to 8-week lifespan.
Eggs are deposited in the burrow and hatch into larvae after approximately 2 to 5 days.
The itchy rash is the result of a TH1-mediated hypersensitivity reaction to various mite-related antigens and is thus delayed.
What are the clinical features of scabies?
However, the rash may be generalised and eczematous features may dominate and mask the classical signs. Clinical suspicion is paramount.
Occurs in 4 to 6 weeks following initial infection (during which time the host is infectious)
Occurs within hours of subsequent re-infection
May persist for several weeks after completion of treatment.
Erythematous papules
Linear scratch marks
Nodules which may be skin coloured, red-brown, or violaceous
Crusting (hyperkeratosis as seen in crusted scabies)
Vesicles which may also be secondary to a superimposed bacterial infection.
Pathognomonic features which can assist in diagnosis
Curvilinear or serpiginous thread-like tracks measuring around 5–10 mm — these can be subtle
Typically identified in the web spaces, palms, soles, fingers, toes, inner wrists, elbows, umbilicus, and beltline.
Varying in size between 3 and 15 mm
May develop on the penis and scrotum in men
On the upper thighs and gluteal folds
Around the areolae in women
A scabies burrow on the toe A burrow on the palm - the mite can just be seen adjacent to the vesicle Numerous palmar scabies burrows in an elderly lady Scabies burrows on the palm Scabies burrows on a babies foot Interdigital scaling in the first web space of the hand
This variant occurs in the elderly and immunosuppressed – the palms and soles become covered in crusted plaques. There is massive infestation with mites, numbering in the thousands; it is highly infectious and there may be heavy infestation of bedding and upholstery.
Thick crusted plaques on the thumb and palm due to crusted scabies in an elderly woman
This can be a widespread nonspecific eczematous eruption on the torso and limbs and may partially obliterate the primary pathognomonic features.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Scabies may present as granulomatous nodules in an infected person with a darker skin type.
Inflammatory changes appear as redness in white skin and greyness in black skin.
What are the complications of scabies?
Previously known as Norwegian Scabies.
Associated with dense hyperkeratosis of the skin.
Caused by an altered host immune response.
Seen particularly in patients with:
Reduced T-cell immunity e.g., HIV
Reduced peripheral sensation e.g., leprosy
Patients unable to debride mites mechanically e.g., Down syndrome and subungual hyperkeratosis.
Results in uncontrolled proliferation of mites (thousands to millions of mites, compared to 10–15 seen in classical scabies).
Usually seen in elderly males.
Bullae may be tense or flaccid.
Thought to be due to either secondary infection of a scabetic lesion with Staphylococcus aureus or due to an autoantibody response.
May be due to a local hypersensitivity reaction to dead mites or may be secondary to persistent infection.
Commonly affects male genitalia (may be a widespread dominant feature in children) and breasts.
Can be seen around the axillae or on the buttocks.
May persist for months despite otherwise successful scabies treatment.
Other complications of classical scabies include:
Modification of the clinical picture secondary to inappropriate use of steroids after misdiagnosis.
Results in delayed diagnosis, sometimes for months or even years.
Secondary bacterial infection
Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes bacteraemia.
Pustular lesions on the palms, soles, fingers, and toes.
Toxin-mediated diseases such as toxic shock syndrome, glomerulonephritis, and acute rheumatic fever.
Psychological distress
Sleep disturbance and an unsightly rash compound the emotional impact of the illness, especially where diagnosis and comprehensive treatment is delayed, when the symptoms can persist for many months.
Scabies with superadded streptococcal infection Scabies nodules in the axilla Axillary scabies nodules in an infant
How is scabies diagnosed?
Several invasive and non-invasive tests exist to aid in confirming a diagnosis of scabies:
Dermoscopy may reveal the ‘delta wing jet’ or ‘mini triangle’ sign. In crusted scabies, dermoscopy may show hyperkeratosis.
For information on trichoscopic findings in scabies of the scalp, see Trichoscopy of scalp infestations.
Skin scrapings using either a blade or needle allow direct visualisation of mites eggs or mite faeces on microscopy. Visualisation of a live mite by the patient galvanises treatment concordance.
A burrow ink test may reveal a classical zig-zag line where the ink has tracked into a burrow.
Adhesive tape test is used to transfer a sample from a suspicious lesion directly to a microscope slide.
Skin biopsy, although rarely necessary, will show eggs, larvae, faeces, and mites.
A scabies mite on microscopy after extraction from a burrow Scanning electron microscopy of Sarcoptes scabei
The International Alliance for the Control of Scabies (IACS) updated consensus criteria for the diagnosis of scabies in 2020, copied below:
A: Confirmed scabies is diagnosed if there is at least one of:
A1: Mites, eggs or faeces on light microscopy of skin samples
A2: Mites, eggs or faeces visualized on an individual using a high-powered imaging device
A3: Mite visualised on an individual using dermoscopy.
B: Clinical scabies is diagnosed if there is at least one of:
B2: Typical lesions affecting male genitalia
B3: Typical lesions in a typical distribution and two history features.
C: Suspected scabies is diagnosed if there is one of:
C1: Typical lesions in a typical distribution and one history feature
C2: Atypical lesions or atypical distribution and two history features.
History features are:
These criteria should be used in conjunction with the full explanatory notes and definitions (in preparation by IACS).
Diagnosis can be made at one of the three levels (A, B or C).
A diagnosis of clinical and suspected scabies should only be made if other differential diagnoses (such as eczema and impetigo) are considered less likely than scabies.
What is the differential diagnosis for scabies?
Bullous skin disorders
Infantile acropustulosis
What is the treatment for scabies?
Launder sheets, towels, and clothes worn recently. Outer garments, duvets, and blankets should be aired for 72 hours.
Vacuum soft furnishings where possible, although this may be of limited benefit.
Clip nails and clean any subungual debris.
Topical 5% permethrin (acaricidal and ovicidal) cream or lotion remains first-line therapy.
Applied over the whole body including face, neck, scalp and ears (or as otherwise advised) and left overnight for 8–12 hours. Reapplication is needed if hands are washed during the treatment period.
Application should include under the nails and between the toes.
Treatment should be repeated after 7–10 days.
If the case is permethrin-resistant, or permethrin is not available, alternative insecticides, include 10–25% benzyl benzoate or 0.5% malathion aqueous lotion.
Spinosad is a topical horticultural insecticide and is effective against scabies where it is available.
Repeat dose after 2 weeks.
Latest data suggests oral ivermectin may be slightly inferior to topical 5% permethrin cream or lotion, and may be slower-acting. This large French study may contrast with experience in other countries where permethrin has been used for a longer period.
According to French dermatology guidance (2024), ivermectin may be an option for children over the age of 2 months. It can also be used in breastfeeding women and during pregnancy from the second trimester onwards, if topical therapies have proved ineffective.
Oral moxidectin is as yet unlicensed, but an effective agent that has good skin retention — it may be effective as a single treatment and prevent re-infestation.
Practical advice to patients
Provide written instruction.
Explain the necessity for complete, contemporaneous compliance with topical therapy.
Household members should elect an early, convenient evening on which to be treated, assemble bedding and clothing for laundry, and apply the topical treatment before dressing and remaking beds.
Itching may last for several weeks, and this does not represent persistent infection or treatment failure.
May persist for weeks
Moderate potency topical steroids may be used and required for 3–4 weeks, particularly if the patient has a widespread eczematous reaction
Emollient use and soap avoidance should be advised
Persistent nodules may need potent topical or intralesional steroids.
Scabies and pregnancy
5% permethrin cream or lotion is considered safe in pregnancy and while lactating.
Alternative topical preparations include sulphur 5–10% cream, ointment, or lotion.
Oral ivermectin is not advised during pregnancy.
What is the outcome for scabies?
Arora P, Rudnicka L, Sar-Pomian M, et al. Scabies: A comprehensive review and current perspectives. Dermatol Ther. 2020;33(4):e13746. doi:10.1111/dth.13746. Review
Engelman D, Yoshizumi J, Hay RJ, et al. The 2020 International Alliance for the Control of Scabies Consensus Criteria for the Diagnosis of Scabies. Br J Dermatol. 2020;183(5):808–20. doi:10.1111/bjd.18943. Journal
Leung AKC, Lam JM, Leong KF. Scabies: A Neglected Global Disease. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2020;16(1):33–42. doi:10.2174/1573396315666190717114131. Review
Morand A, Weill A, Miquel J, et al. Management of scabies in children under 15 kg and pregnant or breastfeeding women: recommendations supported by the Centre of Evidence of the French Society of Dermatology. Br J Dermatol. 2024;191(6):1014–6. PubMed
Richards RN. Scabies: Diagnostic and Therapeutic Update. J Cutan Med Surg. 2021;25(1):95–101. doi:10.1177/1203475420960446. Journal
Seiler JC, Keech RC, Aker JL, Miller W, Belcher C, Mettert KW. Spinosad at 0.9% in the treatment of scabies: Efficacy results from 2 multicenter, randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;86(1):97–103. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2021.07.074. PubMed
Arthropod infestations
Crusted scabies pathology
Differential diagnosis of very itchy skin
Insecticides and the skin
Institutional scabies
Trichoscopy of scalp infestations
Scabies — British Association of Dermatologists
The International Alliance for the Control of Scabies (IACS)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Impetigo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/impetigo]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Impetigo — extra information
School sores, Impetigo contagiosa
L01, L01.0, L01.01, L01.03
1B72.Z, 1B72.0, 1B72.Y, 1B72.1, 1B73.Z
48277006, 399183005, 238374001, 238375000, 399102002, 359751003, 238376004, 762694009
Author: Dr Kate Quirke, Senior House Officer, Rotorua Hospital, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. March 2022. Previous author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Waikato Hospital, New Zealand.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Treatment and prevention
Impetigo is a common, superficial, highly contagious bacterial skin infection characterised by pustules and honey-coloured crusted erosions.
It affects the superficial layers of the epidermis and is typically caused by Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A beta – haemolytic streptococci (GABHS)). It can be classified into non-bullous (also known as ‘school sores’) and bullous impetigo. Ecthyma is a deep form of impetigo causing deeper erosions of the skin into the dermis.
Secondary infection of wounds or other skin lesions with the same pathogens is called ‘impetiginisation’.
Honey-coloured crusts on the chin in impetigo 'Kissing lesions' on both sides of the axilla in impetigo Perioral honey-coloured crusts in impetigo Widespread bullous impetigo over the back An intact blister and erosions in bullous impetigo Honey-coloured crusted lesions in facial impetigo
Risk factors which may predispose an individual to impetigo include:
Skin trauma: lacerations, insect bites, thermal burns, abrasions
Crowded environments.
What causes impetigo?
Impetigo is caused by Staphylococcus aureus, and less commonly Streptococcus pyogenes.
Non-bullous impetigo
Caused by either Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, or both bacteria conjointly.
Intact skin is usually resistant to colonisation from bacteria. Disruption in skin integrity allows for invasion of bacteria via the interrupted surface.
Due to Staphylococcus aureus which produces exfoliative toxins (exfoliatins A and B).
Exfoliative toxins target intracellular adhesion molecules (desmoglein – 1) present in the epidermal granular layer.
Results in dissociation of epidermal cells which causes blister formation.
Can occur on areas of intact skin.
What are the clinical features of impetigo?
Non-bullous impetigo
Most commonly found on the face or extremities but skin on any part of the body can be involved.
Begins with a single erythematous macule which evolves into a pustule or vesicle.
Pustule or vesicle ruptures releasing serous contents which dries leaving a typical honey-coloured crust.
Minimal or no surrounding erythema.
Can spread rapidly with satellite lesions due to autoinoculation.
Patients are typically otherwise well; they may experience some itching and regional lymphadenopathy.
Usually found on the face, trunk, extremities, buttocks, and perineal regions.
Can spread distally due to autoinoculation.
Present as quickly appearing superficial, small or large thin roofed bullae which tend to spontaneously rupture and ooze yellow fluid leaving a scaley rim (collarette).
More likely to have systemic symptoms of malaise, fever, and lymphadenopathy.
Crusted weepy lesions in facial impetigo Impetigo on the leg Facial impetigo
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The initial erythematous macule in non-bullous impetigo may be more difficult to see on darker skin tones.
What are the complications of impetigo?
Wider spread infection: cellulitis, lymphangitis, and bacteraemia.
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis: a rare, acute renal condition following infection with Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus). This is due to a type III hypersensitivity reaction and presents 2–6 weeks post-skin infection.
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome: a rare complication causing diffuse erythematous rash, hypotension, and pyrexia.
Postinflammatory pigmentation.
Scarring, particularly with ecthyma.
How is impetigo diagnosed?
Impetigo is usually a clinical diagnosis based on the features described above.
A skin swab for culture and sensitivity may be beneficial if the impetigo is recurrent, widespread or there is concern of MRSA infection.
Nasal swabs should be carried out in recurrent infection as they can identify staphylococcal nasal carriage which requires specific management.
Rarely a biopsy may be indicated if the diagnosis is unclear (in particular for bullous impetigo) or if it is refractory to treatment.
Histological features are characteristic.
What is the differential diagnosis for impetigo?
Folliculitis (pustular)
Herpes simplex virus
What is the treatment and prevention of impetigo?
Regular gentle cleansing; removal of honey-coloured crusts.
Practice good hand hygiene and keep fingernails cut short.
Cover the affected areas with watertight dressing to prevent spread.
For localised non-bullous impetigo, application of antiseptic 2–3 times per day for 5–7 days is recommended (e.g. hydrogen peroxide 1% cream or povidone — iodine 10% ointment).
Topical antibiotics such as fusidic acid or mupirocin are effective in treating non-bullous impetigo, however, their use may not be recommended in some countries due to bacterial resistance.
Topical antibiotics can be considered when antiseptic treatment has not worked or is not appropriate (e.g. impetigo around the eyes).
Fusidic acid is first-line.
Mupirocin use is often reserved for possible MRSA infection.
Recommended in bullous impetigo, widespread non-bullous impetigo (>3 lesions), when topical treatment fails, a person is at high risk of complications, or when a person is systemically unwell.
Oral flucloxacillin is often the first line antibiotic of choice.
Alternatives may include trimethoprim + sulfamethoxazole or erythromycin (eg, if penicillin allergic or for MRSA infection).
Preventative measures
Avoid touching affected areas.
Practice good hand hygiene; wash hands before and after applying creams.
Use a clean cloth each time to wash and dry affected areas.
Do not share towels or face cloths.
Clothing and bedding should be changed daily; wash using hot temperatures.
What is the outcome for impetigo?
Impetigo is usually self-limiting without serious complications. Without treatment, impetigo usually heals in 2–3 weeks; with treatment lesions resolve within 10 days.
Postinflammatory hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation may occur but scarring is uncommon.
Bowen AC, Mahé A, Hay RJ, Andrews RM, Steer AC, Tong SYC, Carapetis JR. The Global Epidemiology of Impetigo: A Systematic Review of the Population Prevalence of Impetigo and Pyoderma. PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e0136789. Journal
Cole C, Gazewood J: Diagnosis and Treatment of Impetigo. Am Fam Physician. 2007;75(6):859–64. Journal
Hartman-Adams H, Banvard C, Juckett G. Impetigo: diagnosis and treatment. Am Fam Physician. 2014;90(4):229–35. Journal
Hoffmann TC, Peiris R, Glasziou P, Cleo G, Mar CD. Natural history of non-bullous impetigo: a systematic review of time to resolution or improvement without antibiotic treatment. Br J Gen Pract. 2021;71(704):e237–42. Journal
Kato F, Kadomoto N, Iwamoto Y, Bunai K, Komatsuzawa H, Sugai M. Regulatory mechanism for exfoliative toxin production in Staphylococcus aureus. Infect Immun. 2011;79:1660–70. Journal
Williamson D, Ritchie S, Best E, Upton A, Leversha A, Smith A, Thomas M. A bug in the ointment: topical antimicrobial usage and resistance in New Zealand. N Z Med J. 2015;128:103–9. Journal
Bacterial skin infections
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Bullous impetigo case 1
Bacterial infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
How To Treat & When To Seek Help For School Sores — Kid Health NZ: Information on impetigo aimed at parents.
Impetigo: Antimicrobial prescribing. NICE Guideline NG153 2020.
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cellulitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cellulitis]
Cellulitis: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment and more - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cellulitis — extra information
Bacterial cellulitis, Cutaneous cellulitis, Streptococcal cellulitis, Staphylococcal cellulitis
128045006, 402929007, 123951002, 762284008, 278037002
Author: Dr Amy Stanway, Department of Dermatology, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2001. Reviewed and updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University London, United Kingdom; Chief Editor, Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, July 2016.
Differential diagnoses
Cellulitis is a common bacterial skin infection of the lower dermis and subcutaneous tissue. It results in a localised area of red, painful, swollen skin, and systemic symptoms. Left untreated, cellulitis can be life-threatening.
Similar symptoms are experienced with the more superficial infection, erysipelas, so cellulitis and erysipelas are often considered together.
Cellulitis of the left leg
Who gets cellulitis?
Cellulitis affects people of all ages and races.
Risk factors for cellulitis include:
Previous episode(s) of cellulitis
Fissuring of toes or heels, eg due to athlete's foot, tinea pedis or cracked heels
Venous disease, eg gravitational eczema, leg ulceration, and/or lymphoedema
Current or prior injury, eg trauma, surgical wounds, radiotherapy, IV drug use
Immunodeficiency, eg human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV)
Immune suppressive medications
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic liver disease
Many people falsely attribute an episode of cellulitis to an unseen spider bite. Documented spider bites have not led to cellulitis.
What causes cellulitis?
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, usually in a puncture wound of foot or hand
Haemophilus influenzae, in children with facial cellulitis
Anaerobes, Eikenella, Streptococcus viridans, due to human bite
Pasteurella multocida, due to cat or dog bite
Vibrio vulnificus, due to saltwater exposure, eg coral injury
Aeromonas hydrophila from fresh or saltwater exposure, eg following leech bites
Erysipelothrix (erysipeloid), in butchers.
Other forms of skin injury that may increase bacterial exposure and cellulitis infection include surgical wounds and insect bites.
Cellulitis is generally not contagious as it affects the deeper layers of the skin.
What are the clinical features of cellulitis?
Cellulitis can affect any site, but most often affects the limbs
It is usually unilateral; a bilateral disease is more often due to another condition
It can occur by itself or complicate an underlying skin condition or wound.
The first sign of the illness is often feeling unwell, with fever, chills and shakes (rigors). This is due to bacteria in the bloodstream (bacteraemia). Systemic symptoms are soon followed by the development of a localised area of painful, red, swollen skin. Other signs include:
Dimpled skin (peau d’orange)
Erosions and ulceration
Purpura: petechiae, ecchymoses, or haemorrhagic bullae
Cellulitis may be associated with lymphangitis and lymphadenitis, which are due to bacteria within lymph vessels and local lymph glands. A red line tracks from the site of infection to nearby tender, swollen lymph glands.
After successful treatment, the skin may flake or peel off as it heals. This can be itchy.
What are the complications of cellulitis?
Severe or rapidly progressive cellulitis may lead to complications that require prompt treatment:
Necrotising fasciitis (a more serious soft tissue infection recognised by severe pain, skin pallor, loss of sensation, purpura, ulceration and necrosis)
Severe sepsis (blood poisoning)
Infection of other organs, eg pneumonia, osteomyelitis, meningitis
Endocarditis (heart valve infection).
Sepsis is recognised by fever, malaise, loss of appetite, nausea, lethargy, headache, aching muscles and joints. The serious infection leads to hypotension (low blood pressure, collapse), reduced capillary circulation, heart failure, diarrhoea, gastrointestinal bleeding, renal failure and loss of consciousness.
How is the diagnosis of cellulitis made?
The diagnosis of cellulitis is primarily based on clinical features including a physical exam. Investigations may reveal:
Leukocytosis (raised white cell count).
Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP)
The causative organism, on the culture of blood or of pustules, crusts, erosions or wound.
Imaging may be performed. For example:
Chest X-ray in case of heart failure or pneumonia
Doppler ultrasound to look for blood clots (deep vein thrombosis)
MRI in case of necrotising fasciitis.
What is the differential diagnosis of cellulitis?
Cellulitis is often diagnosed when another inflammatory skin disease is actually responsible for redness and swelling. Conditions causing 'pseudocellulitis' include:
Fungal infection eg tinea corporis, tinea pedis
Deep vein thrombosis
Lipodermatosclerosis
Insect bites and stings
Radiation damage following radiotherapy
Inflammatory breast cancer (carcinoma erysipeloides).
What is the treatment for cellulitis?
Cellulitis is potentially serious. The patient should rest and elevate the affected limb. The edge of the involved area of swelling should be marked to monitor progression/regression of the infection.
Knowledge of local organisms and resistance patterns is essential in selecting appropriate antibiotics. The management of cellulitis is becoming more complicated due to rising rates of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and macrolide- or erythromycin-resistant Streptococcus pyogenes.
Treatment of uncomplicated cellulitis
Analgesia to reduce pain
Adequate water/fluid intake
Management of co-existing skin conditions like venous eczema or tinea pedis
Treatment of cellulitis with systemic illness
More severe cellulitis and systemic symptoms should be treated with fluids, intravenous antibiotics and oxygen. The choice of antibiotics depends on local protocols based on prevalent organisms and their resistance patterns and may be altered according to culture/susceptibility reports.
Penicillin-based antibiotics are often chosen (eg penicillin G or flucloxacillin)
Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid provide broad-spectrum cover if unusual bacteria are suspected
Cephalosporins are also commonly used (eg ceftriaxone, cefotaxime or cefazolin)
Clindamycin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, doxycycline and vancomycin are used in patients with penicillin or cephalosporin allergy, or where infection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is suspected
Broad-spectrum antibiotics may also include linezolid, ceftaroline, or daptomycin
Sometimes oral probenecid is added to maintain antibiotic levels in the blood.
Treatment may be switched to oral antibiotics when the fever has settled, cellulitis has regressed, and CRP is reducing.
Multidisciplinary care
An internal medicine physician is consulted to assess and manage sepsis.
The infectious diseases service can advise on microbiology and choice of antibiotic.
A surgeon is called to drain an abscess, debride necrotic tissue, and relieve compression symptoms, eg compartment syndrome.
An ophthalmologist should be involved in the case of orbital cellulitis.
A dermatologist may be called to confirm the diagnosis of cellulitis or suggest alternative diagnoses.
Specialist nurses may advise on dressings and bandaging.
What is the management of recurrent cellulitis?
Patients with recurrent cellulitis should:
Avoid trauma, wear long sleeves and pants in high-risk activities, such as gardening
Keep skin clean and well moisturised, with nails well tended
Avoid having blood tests taken from the affected limb
Treat fungal infections of hands and feet early
Keep swollen limbs elevated during rest periods to aid lymphatic circulation. Those with chronic lymphoedema may benefit from compression garments.
Patients with 2 or more episodes of cellulitis may benefit from chronic suppressive antibiotic treatment with low-dose penicillin V or erythromycin, for one to two years.
Phoenix G, Das S, Joshi M. Diagnosis and management of cellulitis. BMJ. 2012 Aug 7;345:e4955. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e4955. Review. PubMed PMID: 22872711.
Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, Dellinger EP, Goldstein EJ, Gorbach SL, Hirschmann JV, Kaplan SL, Montoya JG, Wade JC; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 Jul 15;59(2):e10–52. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu444. Erratum in: Clin Infect Dis. 2015 May 1;60(9):1448. Dosage error in article text. PubMed.
Thomas KS, Crook AM, Nunn AJ, Foster KA, et al. U.K. Dermatology Clinical Trials Network's PATCH I Trial Team. Penicillin to prevent recurrent leg cellulitis. N Engl J Med. 2013 May 2;368(18):1695–703. Journal
Streptococcal skin infections
Perianal streptococcal dermatitis
Bacterial infections
Bacterial infections online course for health professionals
Blistering skin conditions
Bacterial infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Cellulitis — Medline Plus
Cellulitis — Medscape Reference
Cellulitis — emedicinehealth
Patient information: Cellulitis and erysipelas (skin infections) (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Patient information: Skin and soft tissue infection (cellulitis) (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Cellulitis — American Academy of Dermatology
Systematic reviews on cellulitis — University of Nottingham
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Chickenpox]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/chickenpox]
Chickenpox (Varicella)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Chickenpox — extra information
Varicella, Varicella zoster, Herpes varicella zoster, Herpes virus type 3, Chicken pox
B01, B01.9, B01.89, B01.2, B02
1E90.0, 1E90.Y, 1E91.0
38907003, 19551004, 195911009, 23737006, 402899000, 108729007, 4740000
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2002. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, October 2016;  Dr Adam Dedat, SHO and Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, United Kingdom, July 2022.
Vaccination against chickenpox
Chickenpox is a highly contagious viral infection that causes an acute fever and blistered rash, mainly in children. Chickenpox is also known as varicella.
The name may be derived from the French term for chickpea, chiche pois. Another theory is that the word 'chicken' was derived from a slang term for 'child'.
Skin rash of chickenpox
Chickenpox on back Chickenpox Chickenpox
Who is at risk of chickenpox?
Once a person has had the chickenpox infection, it is unlikely he or she will get it again, as it confers lifelong immunity.
Immunocompromised individuals are susceptible to the virus at all times and should take measures to prevent or modify the course of the disease if there has been exposure to the virus.
What is the cause of chickenpox?
Chickenpox is caused by primary infection with the varicella-zoster virus, of the Herpesviridae family. This virus is sometimes called herpesvirus type 3.
A person who is not immune to the virus has a 70–80% chance of being infected with the virus if exposed to someone in the early stages of the disease.
What are the clinical features of chickenpox?
In children, chickenpox usually begins as itchy red papules progressing to vesicles on the stomach, back and face, and then spreading to other parts of the body. Blisters can also arise inside the mouth
The spread pattern can vary from child to child. There may be only a scattering of vesicles, or the entire body may be covered with up to 500 vesicles. The vesicles tend to be very itchy and uncomfortable.
Some children may also experience additional symptoms such as high fever, headache, cold-like symptoms, vomiting and diarrhoea.
The blisters clear up within one to three weeks but may leave a few scars. These are most often depressed (anetoderma), but they may be thickened (hypertrophic scars). Scarring is prominent when the lesions get infected with bacteria.
Cutaneous features of chickenpox
Chickenpox on face Chickenpox Chickenpox
Oral mucosal lesions of chickenpox
Chickenpox Chickenpox
How is chickenpox diagnosed?
Laboratory tests are often undertaken to confirm the diagnosis.
PCR detects the varicella virus in skin lesions and is the most accurate method for diagnosis.
The culture of blister fluid is time-consuming and is less frequently performed.
Serology (IgM and IgG) is most useful in pregnant women, or before prescribing immune suppression medication to determine the need for pre-treatment immunisation.
What are the complications from chickenpox?
In healthy children, chickenpox infection is usually an uncomplicated, self-limiting disease. Complications may include:
Secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions caused by scratching
Infection may lead to abscess, cellulitis, necrotising fasciitis and gangrene
Dehydration from vomiting and diarrhoea
Exacerbation of asthma
Chickenpox lesions may heal with scarring.
Some complications are more commonly seen in immunocompromised and adult patients with chickenpox.
Disseminated primary varicella infection; this carries high morbidity
Central nervous system complications such as Reye syndrome, Guillain-Barré syndrome and encephalitis
Thrombocytopenia and purpura
Varicella in pregnancy
Approximately 25% of fetuses of mothers with chickenpox become infected. It is harmless to most of them. Offspring may remain asymptomatic, or develop herpes zoster at a young age without a previous history of primary chickenpox infection. They may also develop congenital varicella syndrome, one of the TORCH infections.
Congenital varicella syndrome occurs in up to 2% of fetuses exposed to varicella in the first 20 weeks of gestation. It can result in spontaneous abortion, fetal chorioretinitis, cataracts, limb atrophy, cerebral cortical atrophy and microcephaly, cutaneous scars, and neurological disability.
Mortality in newborns infected with varicella is up to 30%.
If a mother develops chickenpox just before delivery or during the 28 days after delivery, her baby is at risk of severe infection.
Shingles (herpes zoster)
The varicella-zoster virus remains dormant in sensory ganglia after infection.
It may reactivate after many years as shingles. Shingles presents with grouped vesicular lesions, which usually affect a single dermatome.
Other infections occurring as a result of reactivation of virus include post-herpetic neuralgia, vasculopathy, myelopathy, retinal necrosis, cerebellitis and zoster sine herpete.
Complications of chickenpox
Scars from chickenpox Herpes zoster
What is the treatment for chickenpox?
For most healthy patients with chickenpox symptomatic therapy is usually all that is required.
Trim children's fingernails to minimise scratching.
Take a warm bath and apply moisturising cream.
Paracetamol can reduce fever and pain
Avoid NSAID use outside of hospital settings due to the increased risk of severe cutaneous complications such as invasive group A streptococcal superinfections.
Do not use aspirin in children as this is associated with Reye syndrome.
Calamine lotion and oral antihistamines may relieve itching.
Consider oral aciclovir (antiviral agent) in people older than 12 years, which reduces the number of days with a fever.
Immunocompromised patients with chickenpox need intravenous treatment with the antiviral aciclovir.
How to prevent the spread of chickenpox
Vaccination against chickenpox
Vaccination is available for chickenpox and is highly recommended.
Chickenpox is highly preventable by vaccination with live attenuated varicella vaccine. The vaccine is subsidised ("scheduled") for infants aged 15 months in New Zealand as well as non-immune individuals who are immunosuppressed or are in other special groups. If in New Zealand, refer to the Immunisation Advisory Centre for up-to-date information.
Leung, Jessica, et al. Evaluation of laboratory methods for diagnosis of varicella. Clinical Infectious Diseases 51.1 (2010): 23-32. PubMed
Mueller, Niklaus H., et al. Varicella zoster virus infection: clinical features, molecular pathogenesis of disease, and latency. Neurologic clinics 26.3 (2008): 675-697. PubMed
Fan, Feinan, et al. Laboratory diagnosis of HSV and varicella zoster virus infections. Future Virology 9.8 (2014): 721-731.
Nagel, Maria A., and Don Gilden. Neurological complications of VZV reactivation. Current opinion in neurology 27.3 (2014): 356. PubMed
Chickenpox (varicella zoster) in neonates. Health.vic. Neonatal eHandbook. Accessed 16 December 2018 at
Lamont RF, Sobel JD, Carrington D, et al. Varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox) infection in pregnancy. BJOG. 2011;118(10):1155-62. PMC.
Cobelli Kett J. Perinatal Varicella. Pediatrics in Review Jan 2013, 34 (1) 49-51; DOI: 10.1542/pir.34-1-49. PubMed. Journal.
Mikaeloff Y, Kezouh A, Suissa S. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and the risk of severe skin and soft tissue complications in patients with varicella or zoster disease [published correction appears in Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010 Jun;69(6):722]. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;65(2):203-209. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2125.2007.02997.x Journal
Herpesvirus pathology
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Blistering skin conditions
Australian box jellyfish stings
Chickenpox pathology
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Chickenpox — Kidshealth.org.nz
Chickenpox — Medline Plus
Chickenpox — World Health Organization (WHO)
Chickenpox — Medscape Reference
Varicella — Immunisation Handbook 2017, Ministry of Health, NZ
Chickenpox (Varicella) — Immunisation Advisory Centre, University of Auckland
Chickenpox — emedicinehealth
Chickenpox — NHS Choices
Patient information: Chickenpox (The Basics) — UpToDate
Patient information: Chickenpox (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Viral infections during pregnancy — Therapeutics in Dermatology
Chickenpox disease and vaccine information — video from the Immunisation Advisory Centre, New Zealand
How to care for chickenpox video — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Herpes Simplex]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/herpes-simplex]
Herpes Simplex: Causes and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Herpes simplex — extra information
Herpes simplex virus, HSV1, HSV2, Human herpesvirus 1, HHV1, Human herpesvirus 2, HHV2, Infections due to HSV, Cold sore, Fever blister
B00, B00.9, B00.89, B00.1, B00.2, A60.9
1F00.0, 1F00.01, 1F00.02, 1F00.03, 1F00.0Y, 1A94.Z
88594005, 10965007, 407450002, 407451003, 33839006, 1475003, 40981003, 235056002, 43891009, 402892009
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated October 2015.
What is herpes simplex?
Herpes simplex is a common viral infection that presents with localised blistering. It affects most people on one or more occasions during their lives.
Herpes simplex is commonly referred to as cold sores or fever blisters, as recurrences are often triggered by a febrile illness, such as a cold.
Herpes labialis Herpes simplex on the cheek Herpetic whitlow
What causes herpes simplex?
Herpes simplex is caused by one of two types of herpes simplex virus (HSV), members of the Herpesvirales family of double-stranded DNA viruses.
Type 1 HSV is mainly associated with oral and facial infections
Type 2 HSV is mainly associated with genital and rectal infections (anogenital herpes)
However, either virus can affect almost any area of skin or mucous membrane.
After the primary episode of infection, HSV resides in a latent state in spinal dorsal root nerves that supply sensation to the skin. During a recurrence, the virus follows the nerves onto the skin or mucous membranes, where it multiplies, causing the clinical lesion. After each attack and lifelong, it enters the resting state.
During an attack, the virus can be inoculated into new sites of skin, which can then develop blisters as well as the original site of infection.
Who gets herpes simplex?
Primary attacks of Type 1 HSV infections occur mainly in infants and young children. In crowded, underdeveloped areas of the world, nearly all children have been infected by the age of 5. In less crowded places, the incidence is lower; for example, less than half of university entrants in Britain have been infected. Type 2 HSV infections occur mainly after puberty and are often transmitted sexually.
Minor injury helps inoculate HSV into the skin. For example:
A thumb sucker may transmit the virus from their mouth to their thumb.
A health-care worker may develop herpetic whitlow
A rugby player may get a cluster of blisters on one cheek (‘scrumpox’).
What are the clinical features of herpes simplex?
Primary herpes simplex
Primary infection with HSV can be mild or subclinical, but symptomatic infection tends to be more severe than recurrences. Type 2 HSV is more often symptomatic than Type 1 HSV.
Primary Type 1 HSV most often presents as gingivostomatitis, in children between 1 and 5 years of age. Symptoms include fever, which may be high, restlessness and excessive dribbling. Drinking and eating are painful, and the breath is foul. The gums are swollen and red and bleed easily. Whitish vesicles evolve to yellowish ulcers on the tongue, throat, palate and inside the cheeks. Local lymph glands are enlarged and tender.
The fever subsides after 3–5 days and recovery is usually complete within 2 weeks.
Primary Type 2 HSV usually presents as genital herpes after the onset of sexual activity. Painful vesicles, ulcers, redness and swelling last for 2 to 3 weeks, if untreated, and are often accompanied by fever and tender inguinal lymphadenopathy.
In males, herpes most often affects the glans, foreskin and shaft of the penis. Anal herpes is more common in males who have sex with men than with heterosexual partners.
In females, herpes most often arises on the vulva and in the vagina. It is often painful or difficult to pass urine. Infection of the cervix may progress to severe ulceration.
Recurrent herpes simplex
After the initial infection, whether symptomatic or not, there may be no further clinical manifestations throughout life. Where viral immunity is insufficient, recurrent infections are common, particularly with Type 2 genital herpes.
Recurrences can be triggered by:
Minor trauma, surgery or procedures to the affected area
Upper respiratory tract infections
Hormonal factors (in women, flares are not uncommon prior to menstruation)
The vesicles tend to be smaller and more closely grouped in recurrent herpes, compared to primary herpes. They usually return to roughly the same site as the primary infection.
Recurrent Type 1 HSV can occur on any site, most frequently the face, particularly the lips (herpes simplex labialis).
Recurrent Type 2 HSV may also occur on any site, but most often affects the genitals or buttocks.
Itching or burning is followed an hour or two later by an irregular cluster of small, closely grouped, often umbilicated vesicles on a red base. They normally heal in 7–10 days without scarring. The affected person may feel well or suffer from fever, pain and have enlarged local lymph nodes.
Herpetic vesicles are sometimes arranged in a line rather like shingles and are said to have a zosteriform distribution, particularly when affecting the lower chest or lumbar region.
White patches or scars may occur at the site of recurrent HSV attacks and are more evident in those with the skin of colour.
Pustule due to herpes simplex Clustered vesicles, due to HSV, have broken down into erosions on the proximal nail fold
How is herpes simplex diagnosed?
If there is clinical doubt, HSV can be confirmed by culture or PCR of a viral swab taken from fresh vesicles. HSV serology is not very informative, as it’s positive in most individuals and thus not specific for the lesion with which they present.
What are the complications of herpes simplex?
Herpes simplex may cause swollen eyelids and conjunctivitis with opacity and superficial ulceration of the cornea (dendritic ulcer, best seen after fluorescein staining of the cornea).
Throat infections may be very painful and interfere with swallowing.
In patients with a history of atopic dermatitis or Darier disease, HSV may result in severe and widespread infection, known as eczema herpeticum. The skin disease can be active or historical. Numerous blisters erupt on the face or elsewhere, associated with swollen lymph glands and fever.
A single episode or recurrent erythema multiforme is an uncommon reaction to herpes simplex. The rash of erythema multiforme appears as symmetrical plaques on hands, forearms, feet and lower legs. It is characterised by target lesions, which sometimes have central blisters. Mucosal lesions may be observed.
Cranial/facial nerves may be infected by HSV, producing temporary paralysis of the affected muscles. Rarely, neuralgic pain may precede each recurrence of herpes by 1 or 2 days (Maurice syndrome). Meningitis is rare.
Widespread infection
Disseminated infection and/or persistent ulceration due to HSV can be serious in debilitated or immune deficient patients, for example in people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Dendritic ulcer Eczema herpeticum Erythema multiforme
What is the treatment for herpes simplex?
Mild, uncomplicated eruptions of herpes simplex require no treatment. Blisters may be covered if desired, for example with a hydrocolloid patch. Severe infection may require treatment with an antiviral agent.
Antiviral drugs used for herpes simplex and their usual doses are:
Aciclovir — 200 mg 5 times daily for five days
Valaciclovir — 500 mg twice daily for five days
Famciclovir — as a single dose of 3 x 500 mg
In New Zealand, famciclovir is not currently funded by PHARMAC (April 2019).
Higher doses and/or longer courses of antiviral drugs may be used for immunocompromised patients, eczema herpeticum, or for disseminated herpes simplex.
Topical aciclovir or penciclovir may shorten attacks of recurrent herpes simplex, provided the cream is started early enough.
Can herpes simplex be prevented?
As sun exposure often triggers facial herpes simplex, sun protection using high protection factor sunscreens and other measures are important.
Antiviral drugs will stop HSV multiplying once it reaches the skin or mucous membranes but cannot eradicate the virus from its resting stage within the nerve cells. They can, therefore, shorten and prevent attacks but a single course cannot prevent future attacks. Repeated courses may be prescribed, or the medication may be taken continuously to prevent frequent attacks.
Viral skin infections
Herpes virus pathology
Antimicrobial peptides
Blistering skin conditions
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
New Zealand Herpes Foundation
Dermatologic Manifestations of Herpes Simplex — Medicine Reference
Viral infections of the mouth – Medscape Reference
Cold Sores — EmedicineHealth
Herpes Guide.ca — SkinCareGuide.com
Herpes Simplex — British Association of Dermatologists
Herpes Viruses Association UK
Herpes simplex — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Herpes Zoster]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/herpes-zoster]
Herpes zoster. Shingles
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Herpes zoster — extra information
Shingles, VZV reactivaton
4740000, 19551004, 2177002, 449783002
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated October 2015. Minor update October 2025.
What is herpes zoster?
Herpes zoster is a localised, blistering and painful rash caused by reactivation of varicella-zoster virus (VZV). Herpes zoster is also called shingles.
VZV is also called herpesvirus 3 and is a member of the Herpesvirales order of double-stranded DNA viruses.
Herpes zoster  Herpes zoster
Who gets herpes zoster?
Herpes zoster often affects people with weak immunity.
What causes herpes zoster?
After primary infection—varicella—VZV remains dormant in dorsal root ganglia nerve cells in the spine for years before it is reactivated and migrates down sensory nerves to the skin to cause herpes zoster.
It is not clear why herpes zoster affects a particular nerve fibre. Triggering factors are sometimes recognised, such as:
Pressure on the nerve roots
Radiotherapy at the level of the affected nerve root
An injury (not necessarily to the spine)
What are the clinical features of herpes zoster?
Herpes zoster is characterised by dermatomal distribution, that is the blisters are confined to the cutaneous distribution of one or two adjacent sensory nerves. This is usually unilateral, with a sharp cut-off at the anterior and posterior midlines.
The clinical presentation of herpes zoster depends on the age and health of the patient and which dermatome is affected.
The first sign of herpes zoster is usually localised pain without tenderness or any visible skin change. It may be severe, relating to one or more sensory nerves. The pain may be just in one spot, or it may spread out. The patient may feel quite unwell with fever and headache. The lymph nodes draining the affected area are often enlarged and tender.
Within one to three days of the onset of pain, a blistering rash appears in the painful area of skin. It starts as a crop of red papules. New lesions continue to erupt for several days within the distribution of the affected nerve, each blistering or becoming pustular then crusting over.
The chest (thoracic), neck (cervical), forehead (ophthalmic) and lumbar/sacral sensory nerve supply regions are most commonly affected at all ages. The frequency of ophthalmic herpes zoster increases with age. Herpes zoster occasionally causes blisters inside the mouth or ears, and can also affect the genital area. Sometimes there is pain without rash—herpes zoster "sine eruptione"—or rash without pain, most often in children.
Herpes zoster Herpes zoster
What are the complications of herpes zoster?
Involvement of several dermatomes, or sometimes, bilateral eruptions in unique dermatomes
Eye complications when the ophthalmic division of the fifth cranial nerve is involved
Deep blisters that take weeks to heal followed by scarring
Infection of internal organs, including the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and brain (encephalitis)
Herpes zoster is infectious to people who have not previously had chickenpox.
Unlike chickenpox, herpes zoster in immunocompetent pregnant women is not associated with congenital varicella syndrome, intrauterine transmission of VZV to the foetus, miscarriage, or premature delivery.
Post-herpetic neuralgia
What is the treatment of herpes zoster?
Prevention of herpes zoster
Because the risk of serious complications from herpes zoster is more likely in older people, those aged over 60 years might consider the zoster vaccine, which can reduce the incidence of herpes zoster by half. In people who do get herpes zoster despite being vaccinated, the symptoms are usually less severe, and post-herpetic neuralgia is less likely to develop. In New Zealand, the zoster vaccine will be funded from 1 April 2018 for people aged between 66 and 80 years old.
Herpes zoster vaccination is contraindicated in immunosuppressed patients due to the risk of it causing disseminated herpes zoster infection.
Rest and pain relief
Protective ointment applied to the rash, such as petroleum jelly.
Oral antibiotics for secondary infection
Antiviral treatment can reduce pain and the duration of symptoms if started within one to three days after the onset of herpes zoster. Aciclovir 800 mg 5 times daily for seven days is most often prescribed. Valaciclovir and famciclovir are also useful. The efficacy of prescribing systemic steroids is unproven.
Post-herpetic neuralgia
Early use of antiviral medication
Local anaesthetic applications
Tricyclic antidepressant medications such as amitriptyline
Anti-epileptic medications gabapentin and pregabalin
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation or acupuncture
Botulinum toxin into the affected area
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories and opioids are generally unhelpful.
Merck Sharp & Dohme (New Zealand) Limited. 2016. Zostavax Data Sheet. 18 April 2016. URL: medsafe.govt.nz/profs/Datasheet/z/zostavaxinj.pdf (accessed 12 July 2017).
Qian J, Heywood AE, Karki S, et al. Risk of herpes zoster prior to and following cancer diagnosis and treatment: a population-based prospective cohort study. J Infect Dis. 2019;220(1):3–11. doi:10.1093/infdis/jiy625. Journal
Post-herpetic neuralgia
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Herpes virus infection pathology
Herpes zoster — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Herpes Zoster – Medscape Reference
Herpes Viruses Association UK
Shingles - American Academy of Dermatology
Zoster (herpes zoster/shingles) — Immunisation Handbook 2017, Ministry of Health, NZ
Shingles (Herpes Zoster) Vaccination — CDC
Zostavax Vaccine for Shingles — Do Not Use in Immunocompromised Patients. Medsafe Prescriber Update 38(3): 41-42 September 2017.
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Warts]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/warts]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Molluscum Contagiosum]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/molluscum-contagiosum]
Molluscum contagiosum: Causes and treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum — extra information
MC, Molluscum contagiosum virus infection
40070004, 721589000, 765783008, 721590009, 68855006, 240467006
Molluscum contagiosum
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Oakley and Dr Daniela Vanousova, Dermatologist, Czech Republic, in September 2015. DermNet Revision August 2021
What is molluscum contagiosum?
Molluscum contagiosum is a common viral skin infection of childhood that causes localised clusters of umbilicated epidermal papules.
Pseudo-koebnerisation in a scratch (MC-patient3)
Who gets molluscum contagiosum?
Molluscum contagiosum mainly affects infants and young children under the age of 10 years. It is more prevalent in warm climates than cool ones, and in overcrowded environments. Adolescents and adults are less often infected.
Molluscum contagiosum tends to be more numerous and last longer in children who also have atopic dermatitis, due to deficiencies in the skin barrier. It can be very extensive and troublesome in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or that have other reasons for poor immune function.
What causes molluscum contagiosum?
Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a poxvirus, the molluscum contagiosum virus. There are at least 4 viral subtypes.
There are several ways the virus can spread:
Auto-inoculation into another site by scratching or shaving
Sexual transmission in adults.
What are the clinical features of molluscum contagiosum?
Molluscum contagiosum presents as clusters of small round papules. The papules range in size from 1 to 6 mm and may be white, pink or brown. They often have a waxy, shiny look with a small central pit (this appearance is sometimes described as umbilicated). Each papule contains white cheesy material.
There may be few or hundreds of papules on one individual. They mostly arise in warm moist places, such as the armpit, behind the knees, groin or genital areas. They can arise on the lips or rarely inside the mouth. They do not occur on palms or soles.
When molluscum contagiosum is autoinoculated by scratching, the papules often form a row.
Molluscum contagiosum frequently induces dermatitis around them and affected skin becomes pink, dry and itchy. As the papules resolve, they may become inflamed, crusted, or scabby for a week or two.
Shiny umbilicated papules Typical umbilicated papules Associated with eczema
Complications of molluscum contagiosum
Secondary bacterial infection from scratching (impetigo)
Conjunctivitis when the eyelid is infected
Disseminated secondary eczema; this represents an immunological reaction or 'id' to the virus
Numerous and widespread molluscum contagiosum that are larger than usual may occur in immune-deficient patients (such as uncontrolled HIV infection or in patients on immune suppressing drugs), and often affect the face
Spontaneous, pitted scarring
Scarring may be spontaneous or due to surgical treatment
Spontaneous scarring due to molluscum contagiosum
There are reports of Gianotti-Crosti syndrome-like reaction to molluscum contagiosum (GCLR), an eruption resembling Gianotti-Crosti syndrome. It occurs due to a hypersensitivity reaction to molluscum contagiosum. This rash differs from classical Gianotti-Crosti syndrome by the presence of:
Larger papules and plaques
Relative localisation to the extensor surfaces of limbs
Shorter duration (2-6 weeks)
Greater response to topical corticosteroid treatment.
The appearance of GCLR may suggest imminent clearance of molluscum contagiosum.
How is molluscum contagiosum diagnosed?
Molluscum contagiosum is usually recognised by its characteristic clinical appearance or on dermatoscopy. White molluscum bodies can often be expressed from the centre of the papules.
Sometimes, the diagnosis is made on skin biopsy. Histopathology shows characteristic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
Dermoscopy of molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum Molluscum contagiosum Typical rosettes
What is the treatment for molluscum contagiosum?
Picking out the soft white core (note, this could lead to autoinoculation)
Cryotherapy (can leave white marks)
Gentle curettage or electrodessication (can scar)
Laser ablation (can scar).
Antiseptics such as hydrogen peroxide cream or povidone iodine solution
Podophyllotoxin cream
Wart paints containing salicylic acid
Cantharidine solution
Berdazimer gel (a nitric oxide donor)
Secondary dermatitis may be treated symptomatically with a mild topical topical corticosteroid such as hydrocortisone cream. Dermatitis is unlikely to fully resolve until the molluscum infection has cleared up.
Prevention of molluscum contagiosum infection
Molluscum contagiosum is infectious while active. However, affected children and adults should continue to attend daycare, school, and work.
Avoid scratching or shaving
Cover all visible lesions with clothing or watertight bandages
Dispose of used bandages
Do not share towels, clothing, or other personal effects
Adults should practice safe sex or abstinence.
What is the outlook for molluscum contagiosum?
Infection can be very persistent in the presence of significant immune deficiency.
Basdag H, Rainer BM, Cohen BA. Molluscum contagiosum: to treat or not to treat? Experience with 170 children in an outpatient clinic setting in the northeastern United States. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015;32(3):353-7. doi:10.1111/pde.12504. PubMed
Meza-Romero R, Navarrete-Dechent C, Downey C. Molluscum contagiosum: an update and review of new perspectives in etiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2019;12:373-81. doi:10.2147/CCID.S187224. Journal
Olsen JR, Gallacher J, Finlay AY, Piguet V, Francis NA. Time to resolution and effect on quality of life of molluscum contagiosum in children in the UK: a prospective community cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15(2):190-5. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71053-9. PubMed
Olsen JR, Piguet V, Gallacher J, Francis NA. Molluscum contagiosum and associations with atopic eczema in children: a retrospective longitudinal study in primary care. Br J Gen Pract. 2016;66(642):e53-8. doi:10.3399/bjgp15X688093. Journal
van der Wouden JC, van der Sande R, Kruithof EJ, Sollie A, van Suijlekom-Smit LW, Koning S. Interventions for cutaneous molluscum contagiosum. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;5(5):CD004767. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004767.pub4. Journal
Molluscum contagiosum pathology
Viral skin infections
Sexually transmitted infections
Molluscum Contagiosum — Medscape Reference
Poxviruses — Medscape Reference
Molluscum Contagiosum Infection — EmedicineHealth
Molluscum Contagiosum — British Association of Dermatologists
Molluscum Contagiosum — CDDC
Problematic Use of Imiquimod for Molluscum Contagiosum in Children Practice Update review
Molluscum contagiosum: Patient Handout — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Tinea]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/tinea]
Tinea (fungal skin infection)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Tinea — extra information
Last Reviewed: July, 2024
Created 2003; updated 2024.
"Tinea" refers to a skin infection with a dermatophyte (ringworm) fungus.
Depending on which part of the body is affected, it is given a specific name.
Tinea barbae (beard)
Tinea capitis (head)
Tinea corporis (body)
Tinea cruris (groin)
Tinea unguium (nail)
Sometimes, the name gives a different meaning.
Tinea versicolor is more accurately called pityriasis versicolor. This is a common yeast infection on the trunk.
Tinea incognito refers to a tinea infection in which the clinical appearance has changed because of inappropriate treatment.
Tinea nigra is a mould infection (not a dermatophyte). It affects the palms or soles, which appear brown (on white skin) or black (on dark skin).
Tinea amiantacea (usually referred to as pityriasis amiantacea) - this is a scalp condition that is usually due to either psoriasis or severe seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Introduction to fungal infections
Mycology of dermatophytes
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Tinea Infections — Medline Plus
Fungal Guide.ca — SkinCareGuide.com
Patient information: Ringworm, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Patient information: Ringworm (including athlete's foot and jock itch) (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Tinea Versicolor]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/tinea-versicolor]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Fungal Nail Infections]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/fungal-nail-infections]
Fungal Nail Infections — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Fungal nail infections
Fungal nail infections — extra information
Onychomycosis, Tinea unguium, Tinea of nail, Ringworm of nail, Candidal onychia, Dermatophytosis of nail
EE12.1, 1F23.13, 1F23.1, EE10.2, 1F2D.5
414941008, 402134005, 403105006, 403107003, 417583002, 403103004, 403104005, 402137003, 10165000, 23484007, 718526003, 701996000
Fungal nail infections
October 2022Author: Dr Adeline Hillan, Royal Perth Hospital, Australia (2022)Previous contributors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2003)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Differential diagnoses
What are fungal nail infections?
Fungal infection of the nail, also known as onychomycosis, compromises over 50% of all nail disease with an estimated prevalence of 5.5%. They can affect the toenails, fingernails, or both.
Fungal nail infections are also known as tinea unguium in the case of dermatophyte infections.
Total fingernail onychomycosis in type 6 skin (ONYC-patient6)Onychomycosis White discolouration of the distal nail plate in superficial white onychomycosis (ONYC-patient1)Proximal onychomycosis Tinea unguium, toenails Total onychomycosis due to Fusarium species (ONYC-patient7)
Who gets fungal nail infections?
Onychomycosis is common in older aged adults (over 65 years), diabetics, immunocompromised patients (especially those with HIV disease), and athletes. Onychomycosis may be present amongst family members due to autosomal inheritance (HLA-DR8) or environmental factors. It rarely occurs in children.
Other associated comorbidities include: tinea pedis, tinea manuum, psoriasis, peripheral vascular disease, venous insufficiency, hallux valgus, smoking, asymmetric gait nail unit syndrome, Down syndrome, and obesity.
Predisposing patient factors include: chronic paronychia, hyperhidrosis (eg, with occlusive footwear), nail trauma, and using communal bathing or changing facilities.
What causes a fungal nail infection?
Onychomycosis can be due to infection with dermatophytes or non-dermatophytes such as moulds and yeasts.
Yeasts (uncommon): Candida albicans, and rarely non-albicans candida yeasts (eg, tropicalis, or parapsilosis)
For more information, see non-dermatophyte mould onychomycosis.
Emerging evidence of the role of biofilm in fungal nail disease may account for antifungal drug resistance and increased virulence.
What are the clinical features of onychomycosis?
Onychomycosis may affect a single nail or multiple, commonly affecting the first toenail. It may also affect the surrounding skin, however, very rarely causes systemic involvement.
Clinical types include:
Distal and lateral subungual onychomycosis — the distal end and sides of the nail lift or become discoloured and crumble.
Superficial white onychomycosis — flaky, white patches and pits appear on the top of the nail plate.
Proximal subungual onychomycosis — the proximal nail plate close to the lunula becomes discoloured and thickened. This pattern of disease is often related to underlying HIV infection.
Endonyx onychomycosis — milky white discolouration of the nail plate develops without subungual hyperkeratosis or onycholysis.
Features that are observed include:
Subungual hyperkeratosis — scaling occurs under the nail
Jagged and crumbling of the free end of the nail plate
Discolouration of the nail, eg, yellow, white, grey, or green discolouration
Ridging, crumbling, and sometimes eventual complete nail plate destruction
Scaling on the plantar skin and web spaces due to associated tinea pedis
Onychoma or dermatophytoma — a thick localised area of infection in the nail plate.
Onychomycosis may complicate other nail pathology such as trauma or psoriasis.
Candida infection of the nail plate generally results from paronychia and starts near the nail fold (the cuticle). The nail fold is swollen and red, lifted off the nail plate. White, yellow, green, or black marks appear on the nearby nail and spread. The nail may lift off its bed and is tender if you press on it.
Mould infections are similar in appearance to tinea unguium.
What are the complications of fungal nail infections?
Fungal nail infections are often regarded as a trivial cosmetic problem. However, the effect it may have on one’s quality of life is undervalued as it can cause significant pain affecting full mobility and activities, and social stigma.
How is onychomycosis diagnosed?
Physical examination of all nails, and a combination of tools, such as those listed below, may be used to improve speed and accuracy of diagnosis.
Dermoscopy may be able to differentiate between onychomycosis, traumatic onycholysis, and melanonychia. Common dermatoscopic findings include linear bands which round proximally and taper distally, discolouration, non-longitudinal homogenous or reverse triangular patterns, subungual keratosis, white/yellow streaks, and nail plate scales.
The pattern of fungal invasion is further divided into:
Superficial onychomycosis – white patches affecting distal nail
Proximal subungual onychomycosis – involvement of the proximal nail fold under surface to distal
Endonyx onychomycosis – infection of the nail plate but not the nail bed
Mixed pattern onychomycosis.
Clippings should be taken from the crumbling free edge of the affected nail.
The most proximal areas of the dystrophic nail give the best yield on microscopy and culture; they can conveniently be obtained by scraping as proximally as possible under the nail with the hooked end of a clean nail file.
Lesions of superficial white onychomycosis can be scraped using a No. 15 scalpel blade.
Proximal subungual onychomycosis can be sampled by paring the overlying nail plate.
Microscopic examination reviewed under light microscopy using potassium hydroxide (to dissolve keratinocyte material) is a quick test to assess for the presence of fungal hyphae, although it lacks sensitivity and specificity.
Histopathological assessment of nail clippings using haematoxylin-eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, or Grocott methenamine silver staining to visualise fungal hyphae is easy and sensitive. For more information, see histology stains and laboratory tests for fungal infection.
Onychomycosis pathology
Fungal culture testing
Fungal cultures can identify the causative organism and is the standard diagnostic test, however, results can take weeks and a large specimen collection may be required. This technique requires the nail to be cleaned with 70% isopropyl alcohol and soapy water prior to specimen collection.
Samples should be taken prior to starting any treatment.
Trichophyton rubrum culture on agar slope The dermatophyte T.rubrum growing on Sabouraud fungal culture medium
Polymerase chain reaction testing (PCR)
PCR testing quickly identifies the offending organism and is highly sensitive and specific. It is becoming more commonly available, however is more costly than microscopy or fungal culture testing.
Other techniques such as confocal microscopy, optical coherence tomography, infrared thermography, flow cytometry, immunochromatography, and mass spectrometry are currently being explored and rarely used.
A nail biopsy may also reveal characteristic histopathological features of onychomycosis.
What is the differential diagnosis of onychomycosis?
Many other nail diseases may mimic the clinical signs of onychomycosis, hence the importance of diagnostic confirmation to ensure malignant conditions are not missed.
Benign conditions include: bacterial infection such as pseudomonas argeuniosa (CAP), psoriasis, lichen planus, subungual and periungual verruca, paronychia, subungual exostosis, onychomatricoma, yellow nail syndrome, and idiopathic/traumatic onycholysis.
Malignant conditions include: subungual squamous cell carcinoma and subungual melanoma.
What is the treatment for fungal nail infections?
Treatment aims to eliminate the offending organism and restore the nail to health and a normal appearance. Fingernail infections are usually cured more quickly and effectively than toenail infections.
Mild infections affecting less than 50% of one or two nails may respond to topical antifungal medication, but cure usually requires an oral antifungal medication for several months.
Topical antifungal treatment options
Ciclopirox 8% lacquer
Tavaborole 5% solution
Efinaconazole 10% solution
Amorolfine 5% lacquer.
These are often favoured before systemic treatments, if drug interactions are a concern.
With total nail involvement, medical nail avulsion using urea paste may enhance systemic antifungal efficacy.
Oral antifungal treatment options
These are widely used due to accessibility, low cost (some of them), and high efficacy; however, they may require an extended course especially for toenail involvement (3-4 months).
Non-pharmacological treatment options
Infrared laser therapy
Photodynamic therapy
Infrared radiation emission by laser can eradicate nail fungi in 1–3 sessions, however the effectiveness of laser compared to systemic therapy is lacking. Photodynamic therapy, plasma therapy, iontophoresis or ultrasound are adjuncts to topical antifungal therapy thought to enhance the absorption of drug to nail.
Treatment should be individualised, and the patient should be counselled for the estimated time to cure.
How do you prevent fungal nail infections?
Strategies to prevent recurrence include:
Keeping feet cool and dry; avoid using occlusive footwear and excessive sweating
Using thongs/flip-flops in public gyms and swimming pools
Discarding or treating infected footwear and socks
Avoiding nail trauma by trimming nails short
Avoiding unhygienic cosmetic nail practices
Using prophylactic antifungals in feet and webs
Patient counselling for optimal onychomycosis therapy to improve adherence
Addressing poorly controlled diabetes.
What is the outcome of fungal nail infections?
Approximately 20–25% of treated onychomycosis unfortunately relapse due to patient or pathogen factors such as poor circulation, advancing age, diabetes, immunosuppression, severe fungal nail clinical findings, mixed infections, and incomplete treatment. The Onychomycosis Severity Index can be used to predict response to therapy.
Ameen M, Lear JT, Madan V, Mohd Mustapa MF, Richardson M. British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the management of onychomycosis 2014. Br J Dermatol. 2014;171(5):937–58. doi:10.1111/bjd.13358. Journal
Carney C, Tosti A, Daniel R, et al. A New Classification System for Grading the Severity of Onychomycosis: Onychomycosis Severity Index. Arch Dermatol. 2011;147(11):1277–82. doi:10.1001/archdermatol.2011.267. Journal
Gupta AK, Stec N, Summerbell RC, et al. Onychomycosis: a review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2020;34(9):1972–90. doi:10.1111/jdv.16394. Journal
Lipner SR, Scher RK. Onychomycosis: Treatment and prevention of recurrence. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(4):853–67. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1260. Journal
Lipner SR, Scher RK. Onychomycosis: Clinical overview and diagnosis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(4):835–51. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.03.062. Journal
Onychomycosis pathology
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Medical nail avulsion
Fungal nail infections — NHS inform
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Candida Skin Infection]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/candida-skin-infection]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Melanoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/melanoma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Melanoma — extra information
Malignant melanoma, Cutaneous melanoma
93655204, 254325002, 106243009, 103419001
Author: Dr Nicole A. Seebacher, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, United Kingdom, U.K. (2022)Previous contributors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (1997)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Melanoma, also referred to as malignant melanoma, is a potentially very serious skin cancer in which there is an uncontrolled growth of melanocytes (pigment cells).
Normal melanocytes are found in the basal layer of the epidermis (outer layer of skin). Melanocytes produce a protein called melanin, which protects skin cells by absorbing ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
Non-cancerous growth of melanocytes results in moles (benign melanocytic naevi) and freckles (ephelides and lentigines). In contrast, the cancerous growth of melanocytes results in melanoma. Melanoma is described as:
In situ, if a tumour is confined to the epidermis
Invasive, if a tumour has spread into the dermis
Metastatic, if a tumour has spread to other tissues.
Management of melanoma is rapidly evolving. For up-to-date recommendations for the diagnosis and management of melanoma, refer to local guidelines such as the Australian Cancer Council clinical practice guidelines.
Superficial spreading malignant melanoma - irregular border, variable pigmentation, and areas of clinical regression Superficial spreading malignant melanoma - an enlarging pigmented lesion with variable pigmentation, irregular edge, and asymmetry Acral lentiginous malignant melanoma - irregular edge, with variable pigmentation, asymmetry and areas of regression on the heel Nodular malignant melanoma in a vertical growth phase - rapidly enlarging scaly pigmented nodule Irregular pigmented longitudinal bands in melanoma of the nail unit Amelanotic melanoma arising within pigmented melanoma Amelanotic subungal melanoma - a red lesion arising from the nail fold that has produced destruction of the nail plate Multiple blue nodules of cutaneous metastatic malignant melanoma A superficial malignant melanoma - irregular and notched margin, variable and irregular pigmentation in an itchy and enlarging pigmented lesion
In 2019, there were 2,727 melanoma registrations in New Zealand. There were 362 deaths from melanoma in 2016.
Melanoma can occur in adults of any age but is very rare in children. According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, in 2021:
7.9% of people diagnosed with melanoma were aged under 40 years
10.7% were aged 40-49
17.8% were aged 50-59
23.9% were aged 60-69
23.7% were aged 70-79
16% were aged 80 or older.
The mean age for melanoma diagnosis is 65.7 years among men and 62.4 years among women. Melanoma is the most common cancer diagnosed in young Australians aged 15–29 years, accounting for 15% of all cancers in this age group.
The main risk factors for developing the more common type of melanoma (eg, superficial spreading melanoma) include:
Previous invasive melanoma or melanoma in situ
Previous basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma
Many melanocytic naevi (moles)
Multiple (>5) atypical naevi (large or histologically dysplastic moles)
A strong family history of melanoma with two or more first-degree relatives affected
Weakened immune system or cancer-prone syndromes.
These risk factors are not as relevant to rarer types of melanoma.
Although the presence of a large number of common nevi is a strong risk factor for cutaneous melanoma, the majority of melanomas arise de novo. A 2017 meta-analysis of 38 studies including over 20,000 melanomas found that only 29 percent were nevus-associated, with the rest arising de novo.
What causes melanoma?
Melanoma is thought to begin as an uncontrolled proliferation of melanin-producing cells (melanocytic stem cells) that have undergone a genetic transformation.
The cause of these cell mutations can be acquired or inherited.
Acquired 'sporadic' mutations are the most common cause of cancer. They occur from damage to a cell during a person's life. The most common cause of melanoma is overexposure to UV radiation, eg, sun exposure, sunbed use.
Germline 'inherited' mutations are passed down from the parent. Inherited (familial) melanoma is far less common (<10%). CDKN2A (also called p16INK4A or MTS1) is the gene primarily linked in up to 20–40% of familial melanomas. However, in recent years, a growing number of other genes have been implicated, including CDK4, MC1R, MITF, TERT, ACD, BAP1, POT1, and TERF2IP.
Benign melanocytic naevus (normal mole)
Atypical or dysplastic naevus (unusual-looking mole)
Atypical lentiginous junctional naevus (flat naevus in heavily sun-damaged skin) or atypical solar lentigo
Large or giant-sized congenital melanocytic naevus (brown birthmark).
Melanomas have two growth phases, radial and vertical. Most melanomas arise as superficial tumours confined to the epidermis (ie, they have a horizontal growth phase; in situ). These generally grow slowly, but at any time, further genetic changes may cause the tumour to progress to the vertical growth phase, in which the malignant cells breach the basement membrane, invading deeper tissues, resulting in invasive melanoma.
Once the melanoma cells have reached the dermis, they may spread to other tissues via the lymphatic system to the local lymph nodes or via the bloodstream to other organs such as the lungs or brain. This is known as metastatic disease or secondary spread. The chance of this happening mainly depends on how deep the cells have penetrated the skin.
Melanoma classification
Subtypes of melanoma
In 2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) revised the classification of melanoma, distinguishing them by their cumulative solar damage (CSD), anatomic site, epidemiology and mutation signatures. These now include low and high CSD melanomas, desmoplastic melanoma, Spitz melanomas, acral melanomas, mucosal melanomas, melanomas in congenital nevus, melanomas in blue nevus, and uveal melanomas.
Conventional classification
The more traditional morphologic classification by histopathology of melanoma, includes the subtypes:
Superficial spreading melanoma (~55-60% of all melanomas)
Nodular melanoma (~10-15% of all melanomas)
Lentigo maligna melanoma and lentiginous melanoma (in sun-damaged sites) (~10-15% of all melanomas)
Acral lentiginous melanoma (on soles of feet, palms of hands or nails; <5% of all melanomas).
Less common variants include:
Desmoplastic melanoma (~1-2% of all melanomas)
Amelanotic melanoma (~2-20% of all melanomas)
Spindle cell melanoma
Ocular (eye) melanoma.
Combinations may also occur, for example, nodular melanoma arising within a superficial spreading melanoma.
Melanoma is usually epithelial in origin ie, starting in the skin or, less often, mucous membranes. However, very rarely, melanoma can start in an internal tissue such as the brain (primary CNS melanoma) or the back of the eye.
Classification by age
Melanoma can also be classified according to its relationship with age.
Childhood melanomas (< 10 years of age)
Extremely rare (<4%)
Risk factors are genetic, environmental and iatrogenic or acquired immunosuppression
Infrequently associated with excessive sun exposure
Compared to melanoma in adults, they are more often amelanotic (flesh coloured, pink or red), nodular, bleeding and ulcerated.
May arise within giant congenital melanocytic naevi > 40 cm diameter
Often spitzoid melanoma type lacking conventional ABCD features (see below)
Early-onset melanomas
More common in women than men
The most common clinical subtype is superficial spreading
Associated with many melanocytic naevi
Tend to be seen on the lower extremity
Tend to have a BRAF V600E genetic mutation
Associated with intermittent sun exposure
Late-onset melanomas
More common in men than in women
The most common clinical subtype is lentigo maligna
Often occur on the head and neck
Associated with accumulated lifelong sun exposure
What are the clinical features of melanoma?
Melanomas can occur anywhere on the body, not only in areas that get a lot of sun. In New Zealand, the most common site in men is the back (around 40% of melanomas in men), and the most common site in women is the leg (around 35% of melanomas in women).
Although melanoma usually starts as a skin lesion, it can also grow on mucous membranes (mucosal melanoma), such as the lips or genitals. Occasionally it occurs in other parts of the body such as the eye, brain, mouth or vagina.
The first sign of a melanoma is usually an unusual looking freckle or mole and may itch or bleed. Melanomas may grow across the skin (known as the radial growth phase) or grow in depth (known as the vertical growth phase).
Melanoma may be detected at an early stage when it is only a few millimetres in diameter, but it may grow to several centimetres in diameter before it is diagnosed.
A melanoma may have a variety of colours including:
Tan, dark brown, black, blue, red and, occasionally, light grey.
Melanomas that are lacking pigment are called amelanotic melanoma.
There may be areas of regression that are the colour of normal skin, or white and scarred.
During its horizontal phase of growth, a melanoma is normally flat. As the vertical phase develops, the melanoma becomes thickened, raised, and palpable.
Some melanomas are itchy or tender. More advanced lesions may bleed easily or crust over.
Most melanomas have characteristics described by the ABCDE+EFG melanoma criteria or the Glasgow 7-point checklist.
The ABCDEFG of Melanoma
For superficial melanomas — ABCDE signs
A: Asymmetry of shape and colour
B: Border irregularity, including smudgy or ill-defined margin
C: Colour variation and change
D: Different (formerly diameter)
E: Evolving (enlarging, changing)
Melanomas may not conform to the 'ABCD' rule alone. For nodular melanomas, also consider the EFG signs
See ABCDE+EFG criteria.
Taking a thorough history is important, and any lesion that changes in size, shape, colour, or elevation for more than one month should be reviewed by a dermatologist or biopsied.
Glasgow 7-point checklist
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
White or pale skin colour is an independent but significant risk factor for melanoma across diverse ethnic groups. However, people of all skin colours with a family history of melanoma are at increased risk of developing melanoma due to a genetic predisposition.
In skin of colour, it can be harder to identify melanomas, their growth phase, and their pattern as the surrounding skin may mask or match the colour of the melanoma.
People with skin of colour tend to have:
Thicker melanomas at diagnosis and higher mortality rates
Significantly higher rates of melanomas in areas not exposed to the sun, including the subungual, palmar, and plantar surfaces (eg, acral lentiginous melanoma in Pacific Islanders, blacks, and Asians)
Non-cutaneous melanomas (eg, mucosal melanoma, ocular melanoma).
This topic is further discussed on the melanoma of skin colour page.
What are the complications of melanoma?
Metastasis and related systemic effects
Side effects from systemic or radiation therapy
Complications due to surgery:
Incomplete resection
Seromas, lymphoedema, and lymphoceles with node dissection.
How is melanoma diagnosed?
Melanoma may be suspected because of a lesion's clinical features or a history of change.
A thorough history and skin examination will be performed using the "ugly duckling" sign, ABCDE rule, and the Glasgow revised seven-point checklist (described above). This may be supported by dermoscopy, confocal microscopy, total body photography (mole mapping), and adhesive patch genomic analysis, among other methods.
Dermoscopy — Some melanomas are extremely difficult to recognise clinically. The dermatoscopic appearance is helpful in the diagnosis of melanoma. Melanoma-specific criteria often include an atypical pigment network; brown-black dots/globules; multiple (5–6) colours asymmetrically distributed; blue-white veil; depigmentation; and irregular vascular pattern. Dermoscopy monitoring should only be considered for flat or slightly raised lesions, whereas any suspicious or nodular lesions should be excised.
Confocal Microscopy — Where available, reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) may be useful for clinical and dermoscopic examination of suspected melanoma lesions. RCM is a live imaging technology that allows for instant viewing of the epidermis and papillary dermis with nearly histologic resolution. Areas of higher melanin concentration appear as bright areas on a confocal image. This technology is especially useful for identifying amelanotic or hypomelanotic melanomas, mapping surgical margins pre-operatively, and monitoring lesions over time.
Photographic skin surveillance — Where available, total body photography (TBP), eg, MoleMap, should be considered for high-risk individuals, particularly those with high naevus counts and dysplastic naevi. TBP provides a baseline for monitoring new lesions and changes in pre-existing naevi. While not all changed lesions need to be excised, if there is clinical or dermoscopic evidence for melanoma at any point, excision is recommended.
Radiographic investigations — Imaging, such as CT or PET, may be appropriate for staging or surveillance of melanomas that are at significant risk for distant metastases.
Adhesive patch genomic analysis — skin surface tape stripping is a non-invasive test that can be used on pigmented lesions to obtain their genomic signature. It can be used to assist in the diagnosis of melanoma.
Histopathology is required for the definitive diagnosis of melanoma.
Where possible, suspicious lesions should be surgically removed by diagnostic excision with a 2 mm clinical margin and upper subcutis for pathological examination. A partial (incisional) biopsy is best avoided but may be considered where complete excision is not feasible, eg, large lesions. Nail biopsy for suspected melanoma of the nail is discussed elsewhere.
The pathological diagnosis of melanoma can be very difficult. Immunohistochemical stains may help confirm melanoma and include S-100, SOX10, MART-1, HMB-45, MITF, tyrosinase and PRAME. Also, molecular techniques such as gene expression profiling and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), may aid in diagnosis.
If there is invasive melanoma, the pathologist will comment on:
Diagnosis of primary melanoma
Breslow thickness—the Breslow thickness is reported for invasive melanomas to the nearest 0.1 mm. It is measured vertically in millimetres from the top of the granular layer (or base of superficial ulceration) to the deepest point of tumour involvement. It is a strong predictor of outcome; the thicker the melanoma, the more likely it is to metastasise (spread).
Clark level of invasion—indicates the anatomic plane of invasion. Deeper Clark levels have a greater risk of metastasis. It is useful in predicting the outcome of thin tumours. It is less useful than Breslow thickness for thick tumours.
Level 1: In situ melanoma
Level 2: Melanoma has invaded the papillary dermis
Level 3: Melanoma has filled the papillary dermis
Level 4: Melanoma has invaded the reticular dermis
Level 5: Melanoma has invaded the subcutaneous tissue
Margins of excision—the normal tissue around a tumour
Mitotic rate—a measure of how fast the cells are proliferating
Presence of ulceration.
Melanoma staging means finding out if the melanoma has spread from its original site in the skin. Most melanoma specialists refer to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) cutaneous melanoma staging guidelines (8th edition, 2018). In summary, the stages are:
Thin melanoma 2 mm in thickness
Thick melanoma > 2 mm in thickness, or > 1mm thickness with ulceration
Melanoma spread to involve local lymph nodes
Distant metastases have been detected
What is the differential diagnosis for melanoma?
Benign melanocytic naevi (moles)
Pigmented basal cell carcinoma (the most common skin cancer in whites, Asians, and Hispanics)
Squamous cell carcinoma (the most common skin cancer in blacks and Indians)
Pigmented actinic keratosis
Seborrheic keratosis
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
What is the treatment for melanoma?
A dermatologist and oncologist may both be involved to provide a recommended treatment option based on the melanoma stage and other factors such as age and general health.
Surgery is the most common treatment for early-stage (Stage 0, I or II) melanoma. If caught early, 90% of melanomas can be cured with simple surgery alone.
More advanced melanomas (Stage III or IV) may require a combination of treatments, including surgery, drug therapy, and radiation therapy. All melanoma patients with distant metastases should be reviewed by a multidisciplinary team to ensure an optimal treatment combination.
Melanoma therapy is rapidly evolving with the frequent availability of new and more effective treatments. Access to these new treatments is dependent on the results of clinical trials and approval by government bodies. For an up-to-date summary of therapies available, please refer to your local guideline such as the Australian Cancer Council clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of melanoma.
Following confirmation of the diagnosis, wide local excision is carried out at the primary melanoma site. The extent of surgery depends on the thickness of the melanoma and its site.
Margins recommended in New Zealand (2013):
Melanoma in situ: 5–10 mm
Melanoma < 1 mm: 10 mm
Melanoma 1–2 mm: 10–20 mm
Melanoma > 2 mm: 20 mm
Australian Clinical Practice Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of melanoma (updated 2018), recommend, where possible:
Melanoma in situ: 5 mm, and wider margins if appropriate
Melanoma < 1 mm: 10 mm
Melanoma 1–2 mm: 10 – 20 mm
Melanoma 2–4 mm: 10 – 20 mm
Melanoma > 4 mm: 20 mm
If the melanoma is widespread, surgical treatment is not always successful in eradicating cancer. Some patients may be offered new or experimental treatments. Currently, there are two main types of drug therapy used to treat melanoma:
BRAF inhibitors: dabrafenib and vemurafenib
MEK inhibitors: trametinib
Combination BRAF and MEK inhibitors: dabrafenib
C-KIT inhibitors: imatinib, nilotinib
Immunotherapy/immune-modulating therapy
PD-1 antagonist: pembrolizumab and nivolumab
CTLA-4 antagonist: ipilimumab
LAG-3 inhibitor: relatlimab
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
Chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy (CAR-T)
Oncolytic virus - Talimogene laherparepvec (Imlygic)
For a more detailed summary of the immunotherapy agents currently available, see the Cancer Research Institute website.
Chemotherapy is rarely used in Australia and New Zealand for melanoma management.
Radiation therapy is a localised treatment that uses high-energy radiation to kill cancer cells. It may be given on its own (when the patient has a melanoma too widespread for surgery or is unfit for surgery), after surgery (particularly when there is a high risk of recurrence) or as a combination therapy.
Radiation therapy should be considered in patients with a single or small number of brain metastases, painful bone metastases, problematic skin, soft tissue or nodal metastases that have not responded to systemic therapy. This may help relieve symptoms from the metastases.
Should the lymph nodes be removed?
In Australia and New Zealand, it is recommended that lymphatic mapping with a sentinel node biopsy is performed for melanomas thicker than 1 mm or where the melanoma is greater than 0.75 mm with other high-risk pathological features. However, while the biopsy may help in staging cancer and directing the use of adjuvant therapies, it does not offer any survival advantage.
When the sentinel node is removed it is assessed for the presence of malignant cells, which may indicate melanoma spread to other body parts. In the past, a positive sentinel node biopsy required a lymph node dissection to remove all the lymph nodes in the area. However, this is no longer the preferred treatment. Patients may choose to have the procedure to reduce the risk of lymph node field relapse.
What happens at follow-up after a melanoma diagnosis?
Follow-up after a melanoma diagnosis is required to:
Detect recurrence and metastasis (metastatic melanoma) early
Diagnose a new primary melanoma at the first possible opportunity. A second invasive melanoma occurs in 5–10% of melanoma patients, and a new melanoma in situ is diagnosed in more than 20% of melanoma patients.
The current Cancer Council Australia and Melanoma Institute Australia (2022) Clinical Guidelines make the following recommendations for follow-up for patients with invasive melanoma:
Skin self-examination and sun-smart behaviour education
Routine skin checks by the patient's preferred health professional
Follow-up intervals:
Stage I: follow-up annually for 10 years
Stage IIA: every 6 months for 2 years, then annually for 8 years
Stage IIB and IIC: every 3 to 4 months for 2 years, every 6 months during year 3, then annually for 5 years.
Stage IIIA-C: every 3 months for 2 years, every 6 months during year 3, then annually for 5 years.
Individual patient needs should be considered before an appropriate follow-up is offered
Provide education and support to help the patient adjust to their illness.
The follow-up appointments may be undertaken by the patient's general practitioner and specialist. Follow-up appointments may include:
Feel for the regional lymph nodes
General skin examination
Check of the scar where the primary melanoma was removed — including visual inspection and palpation
Full physical examination
Sequential TBP and dermoscopy monitoring of concerning melanocytic lesions in those with many melanocytic naevi or atypical melanocytic naevi.
In those with more advanced primary disease, follow-up may include:
Blood tests: such as LDH, S100B
Imaging: ultrasound, X-ray, CT, MRI, and FDG-PET scans.
Most tests are not worthwhile for patients with stage 1 or 2 melanoma unless there are signs or symptoms of disease recurrence or metastasis. No tests are necessary for healthy patients who have remained well for five years or longer after the removal of their melanoma.
How do you prevent melanoma?
Preventative measures involve addressing risk factors such as exposure to UV radiation, eg, wearing protective clothing, using sunscreen (SPF 50), and avoiding tanning beds. For more information, see skin cancer.
What is the outcome of melanoma?
Melanoma in situ is cured by excision because it has no potential to spread around the body.
The risk of spread and ultimate death from invasive melanoma depends on several factors, including anatomic location, pathologic factors, and mutation status. However, the main factor is the Breslow thickness of the melanoma at the time it was surgically removed.
MIA (2018) Cancer Council Australia Melanoma Guidelines Working Party. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of melanoma. Available at:
Anderson WF, Pfeiffer RM, Tucker MA, Rosenberg PS. Divergent cancer pathways for early-onset and late-onset cutaneous malignant melanoma. Cancer. 2009;115(18):4176–85. doi:10.1002/cncr.24481. Journal
Balch CM et al. Final Version of 2009 AJCC Melanoma Staging and Classification. J Clin Oncol 27:6199–6206. Journal
Dalvin LA, Damento GM, Yawn BP, Abbott BA, Hodge DO, Pulido JS. Parkinson disease and melanoma: confirming and reexamining an association. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;92(7):1070–19. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2017.03.014. Journal
Elder DE, Bastian BC, Cree IA, Massi D, Scolyer RA. The 2018 World Health Organization Classification of Cutaneous, Mucosal, and Uveal Melanoma: Detailed Analysis of 9 Distinct Subtypes Defined by Their Evolutionary Pathway. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2020;144(4):500–522. doi:10.5858/arpa.2019-0561-RA. Journal
Marsden JR, Newton-Bishop JA, Burrows L, et al. Revised U.K. guidelines for the management of cutaneous melanoma 2010. Br J Dermatol. 2010;163(2):238–56. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09883.x. PubMed
Richardson A, Fletcher L, Sneyd M, Cox B, Reeder AI. The incidence and thickness of cutaneous malignant melanoma in New Zealand 1994-2004. N Z Med J. 2008;121(1279):18–26. PubMed
Rossi M, Pellegrini C, Cardelli L, Ciciarelli V, Di Nardo L, Fargnoli MC. Familial Melanoma: Diagnostic and Management Implications. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2019;9(1):10-16. Published 2019 Jan 31. doi:10.5826/dpc.0901a03. PubMed Central
Sturm, R. A., Smit, D. J., Duffy, D. L., McLean, C., Scolyer, R. A., McArthur, G. A., Papenfuss, A. T., Stark, M. S., Soyer, H. P., & Mar, V. J. (2025). Uncovering the molecular mechanisms of amelanotic/hypopigmented primary cutaneous melanoma. British Journal of Dermatology, 192(1), 55–62. doi:10.1093/bjd/ljae336. Journal
Melanoma — information for patients
Melanoma in skin of colour
Melanoma – pathology
Superficial spreading melanoma
Acral lentiginous melanoma
Animal-type melanoma
Desmoplastic melanoma
Diffuse melanosis cutis
Genetics of melanoma
Genetic testing for melanoma
Genes and melanoma – the simple version
Lentiginous melanoma
Melanoma of nail unit
Metastatic melanoma with unknown primary
Spindle cell melanoma
Immunotherapy of melanoma
Topical and intralesional immunotherapy for melanoma metastases
Melanocortin-1 receptor gene
Blood-based melanoma detection tests
Melanocytic naevus (moles)
Basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Skin self examination
Ultraviolet radiation
Skin cancers and precancers — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Australian Cancer Council Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of melanoma.
Melanoma New Zealand
Environmental Health Indicators New Zealand (EHINZ)
Melnet: the Melanoma Network of NZ
Melanoma: assessment and management — NICE guidelines, 2022
Revised U.K. guidelines for the management of cutaneous melanoma 2010 – British Association of Dermatologists, PDF file
Melanoma — American Academy of Dermatology
Cancer Society of New Zealand
Melanoma Outcome Calculator — Laboratory for Quantitative Medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital
Victorian Melanoma Service Melanoma Risk Calculator
Melanoma risk assessment tool — Melanoma Institute of Australia
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Basal Cell Carcinoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/basal-cell-carcinoma]
Basal Cell Carcinoma: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Basal cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma — extra information
BCC, Rodent ulcer, Basalioma, Basal cell carcinoma of skin
Basal cell carcinoma
Last Reviewed: August, 2025
Authors: Honorary Associate Professor Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (1997); Minor update: Dr Anthony Martin Fuentes, General Practitioner and Cosmetic Doctor, Hospital Jose Molina Orosa, Spain (2025)Update peer reviewed by: Dr Andjela Arandjelovic, Dermatology Clinical and Trials Research Fellow, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Australia (2025)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department.
Treatment for primary basal cell carcinoma
Treatment for advanced basal cell carcinoma
What is basal cell carcinoma?
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a common, locally invasive, keratinocyte cancer (also known as nonmelanoma cancer). It is the most common form of skin cancer. BCC is also known as rodent ulcer and basalioma. Patients with BCC often develop multiple primary tumours over time.
BCC is also known as rodent ulcer and basalioma.
Who gets basal cell carcinoma?
Risk factors for BCC include:
Age and sex: BCCs are particularly prevalent in elderly males. However, they also affect females and younger adults
Previous BCC or other form of skin cancer (squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma)
Sun damage (photoageing, actinic keratoses)
Repeated prior episodes of sunburn
Fair skin, blue eyes and blond or red hair — note; BCC can also affect darker skin types
Previous cutaneous injury, thermal burn, disease (eg cutaneous lupus, sebaceous naevus)
Inherited syndromes: BCC is a particular problem for families with basal cell naevus syndrome (Gorlin syndrome), Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome, Rombo syndrome, Oley syndrome and xeroderma pigmentosum
Other risk factors include ionising radiation, exposure to arsenic, immune suppression due to disease or medicines, and use of some other medicines such as hydrochlorothiazide.
What causes basal cell carcinoma?
The cause of BCC is multifactorial.
Most often, there are DNA mutations in the patched (PTCH) tumour suppressor gene, part of the hedgehog signalling pathway.
These may be triggered by exposure to ultraviolet radiation.
Various spontaneous and inherited gene defects predispose to BCC.
What are the clinical features of basal cell carcinoma?
BCC is a locally invasive skin tumour. The main characteristics are:
Slowly growing plaque or nodule
Skin coloured, pink or pigmented
Varies in size from a few millimetres to several centimetres in diameter
Spontaneous bleeding or ulceration.
BCC is very rarely a threat to life. A tiny proportion of BCCs grow rapidly, invade deeply, and/or metastasise to local lymph nodes.
See also: Basal cell carcinoma in skin of colour
Types of basal cell carcinoma
There are several distinct clinical types of BCC, and over 20 histological growth patterns of BCC.
Most common type of facial BCC
Shiny or pearly nodule with a smooth surface
May have central depression or ulceration, so its edges appear rolled
Blood vessels cross its surface
Cystic variant is soft, with jelly-like contents
Micronodular, microcystic and infiltrative types are potentially aggressive subtypes
Also known as nodulocystic carcinoma
Nodular basal cell carcinoma Nodular basal cell carcinoma Nodular basal cell carcinoma Nodular basal cell carcinoma
Most common type in younger adults
Most common type on the upper trunk and shoulders
Slightly scaly, irregular plaque
Thin, translucent rolled border
Multiple microerosions
Basal cell carcinoma Superficial basal cell carcinoma Superficial basal cell carcinoma, face Superficial basal cell carcinoma, back
Usually found in mid-facial sites
Waxy, scar-like plaque with indistinct borders
Wide and deep subclinical extension
May infiltrate cutaneous nerves (perineural spread)
Also known as morpheic, morphoeiform or sclerosing BCC
Morphoeic basal cell carcinoma Morphoeic basal cell carcinoma Morphoeic basal cell carcinoma Morphoeic basal cell carcinoma
Basosquamous carcinoma
Mixed basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Infiltrative growth pattern
Potentially more aggressive than other forms of BCC
Also known as basosquamous carcinoma and mixed basal-squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma Basisquamous cell carcinoma Basisquamous cell carcinoma
What are the complications of basal cell carcinoma?
Recurrence of BCC after initial treatment is not uncommon. Characteristics of recurrent BCC often include:
Incomplete excision or narrow margins at primary excision
Morphoeic, micronodular, and infiltrative subtypes
Location on head and neck.
After PDT After superficial surgery After fluorouracil After imiquimod
Advanced BCCs are large, often neglected tumours.
They may be several centimetres in diameter
They may be deeply infiltrating into tissues below the skin
They are difficult or impossible to treat surgically
Primary tumour is often large, neglected or recurrent, located on head and neck, with aggressive subtype
May have had multiple prior treatments
May arise in-site exposed to ionising radiation
How is basal cell carcinoma diagnosed?
BCC is diagnosed clinically by the presence of a slowly enlarging skin lesion with typical appearance.
BCC dermoscopy criteria
Menzies’ algorithm (Menzies, 2000)
Absence of pigment network
Presence of ≥1 among:
Arborizing vessels (telangiectasia with tree-like branching)
Blue-gray ovoid nests
Additional criteria for non-pigmented, superficial BCC:
Shiny white to red structure-less areas
Short fine telangiectasia
Multiple small ulcerations (erosions).
Additional non-classical criteria:
Concentric structures
Blue-gray dots, in focus
Melanocytic-like criteria
Brown-black dots and globules
Blue-white veil-like structures
Non-classical vascular patterns (hairpin, glomerular, dotted, comma).
Structures under polarised light:
Shiny white lines — tend to be disorganised or arranged in parallel
Shiny white areas (blotches)
Additional recent criteria:
Stellate pattern — from the visible tumour edge; may be formed by white lines, vessels, or uneven skin surfaces
Negative maple leaf-like areas
Multiple aggregated yellow-white (MAY) globules.
The diagnosis and histological subtype is usually confirmed pathologically by a diagnostic biopsy or following excision. See: basal cell carcinoma pathology.
What is the treatment for primary basal cell carcinoma?
The treatment for a BCC depends on its type, size and location, the number to be treated, patient factors, and the preference or expertise of the doctor. Most BCCs are treated surgically. Long-term follow-up is recommended to check for new lesions and recurrence; the latter may be unnecessary if histology has reported wide clear margins.
Excision means the lesion is cut out and the skin stitched up.
Most appropriate treatment for nodular, infiltrative and morphoeic BCCs.
Should include 3 to 5 mm margin of normal skin around the tumour.
Very large lesions may require flap or skin graft to repair the defect.
A pathologist will report deep and lateral margins.
Further surgery is recommended for lesions that are incompletely excised.
Mohs micrographically controlled excision
Mohs micrographically controlled surgery involves examining carefully marked excised tissue under the microscope, layer by layer, to ensure complete excision.
Very high cure rates achieved by trained Mohs surgeons.
Used in high-risk areas of the face around eyes, lips, and nose.
Suitable for ill-defined, morphoeic, infiltrative and recurrent subtypes.
Large defects are repaired by flap or skin graft.
Superficial skin surgery
Superficial skin surgery comprises shave, curettage, and electrocautery. It is a rapid technique using local anaesthesia and does not require sutures.
Suitable for small, well-defined nodular or superficial BCCs.
Lesions are usually located on the trunk or limbs.
Wound is left open to heal by secondary intention.
Moist wound dressings lead to healing within a few weeks.
Eventual scar quality variable.
Cryotherapy is the treatment of a superficial skin lesion by freezing it, usually with liquid nitrogen.
Suitable for small superficial BCCs on covered areas of the trunk and limbs.
Best avoided for BCCs on head and neck, and distal to knees.
Double freeze-thaw technique.
Results in a blister that crusts over and heals within several weeks.
Leaves permanent white mark.
Photodynamic therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) refers to a technique in which BCC is treated with a photosensitising chemical, and exposed to light several hours later.
Topical photosensitisers include aminolevulinic acid lotion and methyl aminolevulinate cream.
Suitable for low-risk small, superficial BCCs.
Best avoided if tumour in-site at high risk of recurrence.
Results in inflammatory reaction, maximal 3–4 days after procedure.
Treatment repeated 7 days after initial treatment.
Excellent cosmetic results.
Imiquimod is an immune response modifier.
Best used for superficial BCCs less than 2 cm diameter.
Applied three to five times each week, for 6–16 weeks.
Results in a variable inflammatory reaction, maximal at three weeks.
Minimal scarring is usual.
5-Fluorouracil cream is a topical cytotoxic agent.
Used to treat small superficial basal cell carcinomas.
Requires prolonged course, eg twice daily for 6–12 weeks.
Causes inflammatory reaction.
Has high recurrence rates.
Radiotherapy or X-ray treatment can be used to treat primary BCCs or as adjunctive treatment if margins are incomplete.
Mainly used if surgery is not suitable.
Best avoided in young patients and in genetic conditions predisposing to skin cancer.
Best cosmetic results achieved using multiple fractions.
Typically, patient attends once-weekly for several weeks.
Causes inflammatory reaction followed by scar.
Risk of radiodermatitis, late recurrence, and new tumours.
What is the treatment for advanced or metastatic basal cell carcinoma?
Locally advanced primary, recurrent or metastatic BCC requires multidisciplinary consultation. Often a combination of treatments is used.
Targeted therapy refers to the hedgehog signalling pathway inhibitors, vismodegib and sonidegib. These drugs have some important risks and side effects.
How can basal cell carcinoma be prevented?
The most important way to prevent BCC is to avoid sunburn. This is especially important in childhood and early life. Fair-skinned individuals and those with a personal or family history of BCC should protect their skin from sun exposure daily, year-round and lifelong.
Stay indoors or under the shade in the middle of the day.
Wear covering clothing.
Apply high protection factor SPF50+ broad-spectrum sunscreens generously to exposed skin if outdoors.
Avoid indoor tanning.
Oral nicotinamide (vitamin B3) in a dose of 500 mg twice daily may reduce the number and severity of BCCs.
What is the outlook for basal cell carcinoma?
Most BCCs are cured by treatment. Cure is most likely if treatment is undertaken when the lesion is small.
Álvarez-Salafranca M, Ara M, Zaballos P. Dermoscopy in Basal Cell Carcinoma: An Updated Review. Advances in Dermatology. 2021; doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2020.11.011. Journal
Barbarossa L, D’Onghia M, Cartocci A, Suppa M, Tognetti L, Cappilli S, Peris K, Perez-Anker J, Malvehy J, Baldino G, et al. Understanding the Dermoscopic Patterns of Basal Cell Carcinoma Using Line-Field Confocal Tomography. Tomography. 2024; 10(6):826-838. Journal
Kim DP, Kus KJB, Ruiz E. Basal Cell Carcinoma Review. Head & Neck Oncology. 2018;10(1):21. doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2018.09.004. Journal
Menzies SW, Westerhoff K, Rabinovitz H, Kopf AW, McCarthy WH, Katz B. Surface Microscopy of Pigmented Basal Cell Carcinoma. Arch Dermatol. 2000;136(8):1012–1016. doi:10.1001/archderm.136.8.1012. Journal
Wojtowicz I, Żychowska M. Dermoscopy of Basal Cell Carcinoma Part 1: Dermoscopic Findings and Diagnostic Accuracy-A Systematic Literature Review. Cancers (Basel). 2025;17(3):493. Published 2025 Feb 1. doi:10.3390/cancers17030493. Journal
Work Group; Kim JYS, Kozlow JH, Mittal B, Moyer J, Olencki T, Rodgers P. Guidelines of care for the management of basal cell carcinoma. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78(3):540-559. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.10.006. Journal
Basal cell carcinoma — common skin lesions course | Basal cell carcinoma dermoscopy | Genetics of basal cell carcinoma | Basal cell carcinoma pathology | Basal cell carcinoma in skin of colour
Bazex syndrome | Gorlin syndrome
Dermatological procedures | Mohs micrographic surgery | Targeted cancer therapy
Melanoma in skin of colour
Skin cancer | Skin lesions | Vulval cancer
Ultraviolet radiation
Skin cancers and precancers — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Cancer Council Australia
Clinical practice guidelines for keratinocyte cancer — Cancer Guidelines wiki
American College of Mohs Micrographic Surgery and Oncology
Mohs Micrographic Surgery from Johns Hopkins Oncology Center
Basal cell carcinoma: emedicine dermatology, the online medical reference textbook.
Basal cell carcinoma — British Association of Dermatologists
Optimal care pathway for people with basal cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma — Cancer Council of Australia, June 2016
Basal cell carcinoma — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Squamous Cell Carcinoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/squamous-cell-carcinoma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Actinic Keratosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/actinic-keratosis]
Actinic keratoses (Solar keratosis): Diagnosis and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Actinic keratosis — extra information
Lesions (cancerous), Lesions (benign)
Authors: Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, United Kingdom; Editor-in-Chief of DermNet (2024). Minor update November 2025.Previous contributors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, (1997); further updated December 2015.
Edited by the DermNet content department.
What is an actinic keratosis?
Actinic keratosis is a precancerous scaly spot found on sun-damaged skin, also known as solar keratosis. It may be considered an early form of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (a keratinocyte cancer).
A pink base with a hyperkeratotic top on the nasal bridge - a common site for actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis on the nose A rough scaly lesion on the back of the hand - a common site for an actinic keratosis
Who gets actinic keratoses?
Actinic keratoses affect people that have often lived in the tropics or subtropics and have predisposing factors such as:
Other signs of photoageing skin
Fair skin with a history of sunburn
History of long hours spent outdoors for work or recreation
Defective immune system.
However, even in temperate climates they may be common - in southern Ireland and northwest England up to 25% of people aged 60 years and over have at least one.
What causes actinic keratoses?
Actinic keratoses are the result of abnormal skin cell development due to DNA damage by short wavelength UVB.
They are more likely to appear if the immune function is poor, due to ageing, recent sun exposure, predisposing disease, or certain drugs.
What are the clinical features of actinic keratosis?
Actinic keratosis may be solitary but there are often multiple keratoses. The appearance varies.
A flat or thickened papule, or plaque
White or yellow; scaly, warty, or horny surface
Skin coloured, red, or pigmented
Tender or asymptomatic
They are sometimes graded according to their appearance:
Grade 1: Mild pink or grey marks with slight scale and gritty to touch
Grade 2: Moderate thicker hyperkeratosis and easily detected
Grade 3: Severe hyperkeratotic thick keratin
Grade 4: Confluent areas several centimetres with a range of the above grades of AK
Actinic keratoses are very common on sites repeatedly exposed to the sun, especially the backs of the hands and the face, most often affecting the ears, nose, cheeks, upper lip, vermilion of the lower lip, temples, forehead, and balding scalp. In severely chronically sun-damaged individuals, they may also be found on the upper trunk, upper and lower limbs, and dorsum of feet.
Field change over the forehead with multiple superficial actinic keratoses Thicker actinic keratoses on the dorsal hand Hyperkeratotic actinic keratoses on the forehead
Keratoses on the nose
Keratoses on the face
Keratoses on the scalp
Keratoses on the hands
Keratoses on the legs
Keratoses treated with imiquimod
Complications of actinic keratoses
Cutaneous horn may arise from an underlying actinic keratosis or SCC.
Because they are sun damaged, people with actinic keratoses are also at risk of developing actinic cheilitis, basal cell carcinoma (BCC, which is more common than SCC), melanoma, and rare forms of skin cancer such as Merkel cell carcinoma.
How is an actinic keratosis diagnosed?
Actinic keratosis is usually easy to diagnose clinically or by dermoscopy (see actinic keratosis dermoscopy). Occasionally, a biopsy is necessary, for example, to exclude SCC, or if treatment fails.
What is the treatment for actinic keratoses?
Actinic keratoses are usually removed because they are unsightly or uncomfortable, or because of the risk that skin cancer may develop in them. The latter point is a matter of considerable debate, and the most robust studies (Cochrane review) did not find convincing evidence that AK treatment resulted in a prevention of invasive squamous cell carcinomas.
Treatment of an actinic keratosis requires removal of the defective skin cells. Epidermis regenerates from surrounding or follicular keratinocytes that have escaped sun damage.Some AKs will resolve with the frequent and appropriate use of sunscreens.
Tender, thickened, ulcerated, or enlarging actinic keratoses should be treated aggressively. Asymptomatic flat keratoses may not require active treatment but should be kept under observation.
Physical treatments are used to destroy individual keratoses that are generally symptomatic or have a thick hard surface scale. The lesions may recur in time, in which case they may be retreated by the same or a different method.
Cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen
Liquid nitrogen spray is required to achieve adequate depth and duration of the freeze. This varies according to lesion location, width, and thickness. Healing varies from 5–10 days on the face, 3–4 weeks on the hands, and 6 weeks or longer on the legs. A light freeze for a superficial actinic keratosis usually leaves no mark, but longer freeze times result in hypopigmentation or scar.
Shave, curettage and electrocautery
Shave, curettage (scraping with a sharp instrument) and electrocautery (burning) may be necessary to remove a cutaneous horn or hypertrophic actinic keratosis. Healing of the wound takes several weeks or longer, depending on the body site. The specimen is sent for histological examination.
Excision ensures the actinic keratosis has been completely removed, which should be confirmed by pathology. The surgical wound is sutured (stitched). The sutures are removed after a few days, the time depending on the size and location of the lesion. The procedure leaves a permanent scar.
Creams are used to treat areas of sun damage and flat actinic keratoses, sometimes after physical treatments have been carried out. Field treatments are most effective on facial skin. Pretreatment with keratolytics (such as urea cream, salicylic acid ointment or topical retinoid), and thorough skin cleansing improves response rates. Results are variable and the course of treatment may need repeating from time to time. With the exception of diclofenac gel, field treatments all result in local inflammatory reactions such as redness, blistering and discomfort for a varying length of time.
Diclofenac is more often used as an anti-inflammatory drug. A special gel formulation (3%) in a base containing sodium hyaluronate) is applied twice daily for 3 months, it is fairly well tolerated in the treatment of actinic keratoses, but less effective than the other options listed here.
Piroxicam - similar to diclofenac.
5-Fluorouracil is a cytotoxic agent. The cream formulation is applied once or twice daily for 2 to 8 weeks. Its effect may be enhanced by calcipotriol ointment. 5-fluorouracil may be available as a combination product along with salicylic acid.
Skin peels using trichloroacetic acid or Jessner solution.
Imiquimod cream is an immune response modifier. It is applied 2 or 3 times weekly for 4 to 16 weeks.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves applying a photosensitiser (a porphyrin chemical such as methyl aminolevulinic acid) to the affected area prior to exposing it to a source of visible light. Using daylight as the light source is free, and almost painless. Artificial sources are more predictable, exposure times are shorter but can be painful.
Tirbanibulin is a synthetic inhibitor of tubulin polymerisation and protein kinase signalling. This 5 day topical treatment received a product license in countries such as the USA, UK, and Germany in 2021.
Oral retinoids have been used in organ transplant recipients and are shown to reduce the risk of SCC development in those with numerous AKs.
Prevention of actinic keratoses
Actinic keratoses are prevented by strict sun protection. If already present, actinic keratoses may improve with a very high sun protection factor (50+) broad-spectrum sunscreen applied at least daily to affected areas, year-round.
The number and severity of actinic keratoses can also be reduced by taking nicotinamide (vitamin B3) 500 mg twice daily.
Alpha-HPV vaccination may reduce the number of AKs in immunocompetent individuals with multiple AKs. However, to date, HPV vaccination has not been shown to reduce the incidence of cutaneous keratinocyte cancers.
What is the outlook for actinic keratoses?
Actinic keratoses may recur months or years after treatment. The same treatment can be repeated or another method used. Patients who have been treated for actinic keratoses are at risk of developing new keratoses. They are also at increased risk of other skin cancers, especially intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma, invasive cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma and melanoma.
Cunningham TJ, Tabacchi M, Eliane JP, Tuchayi SM, Manivasagam S, Mirzaalian H, Turkoz A, Kopan R, Schaffer A, Saavedra AP, Wallendorf M, Cornelius LA, Demehri S. Randomized trial of calcipotriol combined with 5-fluorouracil for skin cancer precursor immunotherapy. J Clin Invest. 2017 Jan 3;127(1):106–16. doi: 10.1172/JCI89820. PubMed PMID: 27869649; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5199703. PubMed
de Berker D, McGregor JM, Hughes BR. Guidelines for the management of actinic keratoses. British Journal of Dermatology. 2007;156(2):222-230. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2006.07692.x Journal
de Berker D, McGregor JM, Mohd Mustapa MF, Exton LS, Hughes BR. British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the care of patients with actinic keratosis 2017. Br J Dermatol. 2017;176(1):20-43. doi:10.1111/bjd.15107 Journal
Del Regno L, Catapano S, Di Stefani A, Cappilli S, Peris K. A Review of Existing Therapies for Actinic Keratosis: Current Status and Future Directions [published correction appears in Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022 Apr 22]. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(3):339-352. doi:10.1007/s40257-022-00674-3 Journal
Dirschka T, Gupta G, Micali G, et al. Real-world approach to actinic keratosis management: practical treatment algorithm for office-based dermatology. J Dermatolog Treat. 2017;28(5):431-442. Journal
Eisen DB, Asgari MM, Bennett DD, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of actinic keratosis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;85(4):e209-e233. Journal
Wenande E, Hastrup A, Wiegell S, et al. Human Papillomavirus Vaccination and Actinic Keratosis Burden: The VAXAK Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Dermatol. Published online March 6, 2025. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2025.0531 Journal
Actinic keratosis dermoscopy
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma (Bowen disease)
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma
Ultraviolet radiation
Skin cancers and precancers — DermNet e-lectures [Youtube]
Actinic Keratosis — Medscape Reference
Patient Information Leaflets (PILs): Actinic keratoses — British Association of Dermatologists
Actinic Keratosis — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dysplastic Naevi]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dysplastic-naevi]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dermatofibroma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dermatofibroma]
Dermatofibroma (histiocytoma)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Dermatofibroma — extra information
Fibrous histiocytoma, Histiocytoma cutis, Cutaneous fibrous histiocytoma, Sclerosing haemangioma, Dermatofibroma lenticulare, Subepidermal nodular fibrosis, Sclerosing angioma, Fibroma simplex, Dermal dendrocytoma
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated January 2016. Revised September 2020
What is a dermatofibroma?
A dermatofibroma is a common benign fibrous nodule usually found on the skin of the lower legs.
A dermatofibroma is also called a cutaneous fibrous histiocytoma.
Who gets a dermatofibroma?
Dermatofibromas are mostly seen in adults. People of every ethnicity can develop dermatofibromas. Ordinary dermatofibromas are more common in women than in men, although some histologic variants are more commonly identified in males.
What causes dermatofibroma?
It is not clear if dermatofibroma is a reactive process or a true neoplasm. The lesions are composed of proliferating fibroblasts. Histiocytes may also be involved.
They are sometimes attributed to minor trauma including insect bites, injections, or a rose thorn injury, but not consistently. Multiple dermatofibromas can develop in patients with altered immunity such as HIV, immunosuppression, or autoimmune conditions.
What are the clinical features of dermatofibroma?
A dermatofibroma usually presents as a solitary firm papule or nodule on a limb.
A dermatofibroma can occur anywhere on the skin.
Dermatofibroma size varies from 0.5–1.5 cm diameter; most lesions are 7–10 mm diameter.
A dermatofibroma is tethered to the skin surface and mobile over subcutaneous tissue.
The overlying skin dimples on pinching the lesion – the dimple or pinch sign.
Colour may be pink to light brown in white skin, and dark brown to black in dark skin; some appear paler in the centre.
Dermatofibromas do not usually cause symptoms, but they are sometimes painful, tender, or itchy.
Clinical variants include giant, eruptive, and multiple forms.
Dermatofibroma Dermatofibroma Dermatofibroma Dermatofibroma Pinch sign of dermatofibroma Dermoscopy of dermatofibroma
What are the complications of dermatofibroma?
Because dermatofibromas are often raised lesions, they may be traumatised, for example by a razor.
Occasionally dozens may erupt within a few months, usually in the setting of immunosuppression.
Dermatofibroma does not give rise to cancer. However, occasionally, it may be mistaken for dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans or desmoplastic melanoma.
How is a dermatofibroma diagnosed?
Dermatofibroma is usually easy to diagnose clinically, supported by dermoscopy. The most common dermoscopic pattern is a central white area surrounded by a faint pigment network. However different patterns may be seen in skin of colour.
Diagnostic excision or skin biopsy is undertaken if there is an atypical feature such as recent enlargement, ulceration, or asymmetrical structures and colours on dermoscopy.
The pathology of dermatofibroma shows whirling fascicles of spindle cell proliferation with excessive collagen deposition in the dermis. There are many pathological variants including:
lipidized ankle-type
In case of doubt, immunohistochemical staining is used to confirm the diagnosis.
What is the treatment for dermatofibroma?
A dermatofibroma is harmless and seldom causes any symptoms. Usually, only reassurance is needed. If it is nuisance or causing concern, the lesion can be removed surgically. Recurrence is common as the lesion often extends beyond the clinical margin.
Cryotherapy, shave biopsy and laser treatments are rarely completely successful.
Beatrous SV, Riahi RR, Grisoli SB, Cohen PR. Associated conditions in patients with multiple dermatofibromas: case reports and literature review. Dermatol Online J. 2017;23(9):13030/qt8zv852d8. PubMed
Alves JV, Matos DM, Barreiros HF, Bártolo EA. Variants of dermatofibroma--a histopathological study. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):472–7. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142629. PubMed
Kelati A, Aqil N, Baybay H, Gallouj S, Mernissi FZ. Beyond classic dermoscopic patterns of dermatofibromas: a prospective research study. J Med Case Rep. 2017;11(1):266. doi:10.1186/s13256-017-1429-6. PubMed
Juliandri J, Wang XY, Liu ZJ, Zhang JW, Xu Y. Dermoscopic patterns of dermatofibroma in 72 Chinese patients. Chin Med J (Engl). 2019;132(17):2121–2. doi:10.1097/CM9.0000000000000406. PubMed
Calonje E. Soft-tissue tumours and tumour-like conditions. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016:137.19–22.
Common benign skin lesions
Dermatofibroma – pathology
Epithelioid histiocytoma – pathology
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Fibrous papule of the nose
Dermal and subcutaneous tumours – common skin lesions course
Dermatofibroma — Medscape Reference
Dermatofibroma — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lupus Erythematosus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lupus-erythematosus]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dermatomyositis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dermatomyositis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Scleroderma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/scleroderma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Scleroderma — extra information
Connective tissue diseases
Connective tissue diseases
The term scleroderma refers to hardened skin. There are various conditions that are affected by scleroderma or appear similar to it.
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans
Systemic sclerosis and CRST syndrome
Mixed connective tissue disease
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Morphoea or localised scleroderma
Lipodermatosclerosis
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Atrophoderma of Pasini and Pierini
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pemphigus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pemphigus]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pemphigus — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Benign familial pemphigus
Brazilian pemphigus foliaceus
Drug-induced pemphigus
Endemic pemphigus foliaceus
Familial benign pemphigus pathology
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Paraneoplastic pemphigus pathology
Pemphigus foliaceus pathology
Pemphigus vulgaris pathology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Bullous Pemphigoid]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/bullous-pemphigoid]
Bullous Pemphigoid: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Bullous pemphigoid — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author: Honorary Associate Professor Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated in January 2016; minor update by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, Feb 2025.
What is bullous pemphigoid?
Bullous pemphigoid is the most common form of autoimmune subepidermal blistering disease.
Who gets bullous pemphigoid?
Bullous pemphigoid often presents in people over 80 years of age, and mostly affects people over 50. It can occur in younger adults, but bullous pemphigoid in infants and children is rare.
Bullous pemphigoid occurs equally in males and females.
There is an association with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) indicating a genetic predisposition to the disease.
It is more prevalent in older patients with neurological disease, particularly stroke, dementia and Parkinson disease.
The risk of developing bullous pemphigoid is greater in people with psoriasis, and it can be precipitated by treatment of psoriasis with phototherapy.
There may be an association with internal malignancy in some patients.
A drug, an injury, or skin infection can trigger the onset of disease.
Rarely, bullous pemphigoid can be associated with acquired haemophilia due to anti-factor VIII antibody formation.
Drugs associated with bullous pemphigoid
The most common drugs associated with bullous pemphigoid are the PD1-inhibitor immunotherapies (such as pembrolizumab, nivolumab) used to treat metastatic melanoma and other cancers.
Pemphigoid occurs in 0.3% of cancer patients treated with checkpoint inhibitors, and may develop after 12 months of therapy, or even after they are discontinued. Prodromal itch before blistering and mucosal blisters are common. Drug withdrawal is usually required.
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (often called 'gliptins'), used to treat diabetes mellitus (such as sitagliptin, saxagliptin, linagliptin and especially, vildagliptin), have also been reported to induce bullous pemphigoid. The median time to onset of bullous pemphigoid is 11 months after initiation of therapy. Unusually, mucosal involvement occurs.
What causes bullous pemphigoid?
Bullous pemphigoid is the result of an attack on the basement membrane of the epidermis by IgG +/- IgE immunoglobulins (antibodies) and activated T lymphocytes (white blood cells). The target is the protein BP180 (also called Type XVII collagen), or less frequently BP230 (a plakin). These proteins are within the NC16A domain of collagen XVII. They are associated with the hemidesmosomes, structures that ensure the epidermal keratinocyte cells stick to the dermis to make a waterproof seal.
The binding of the autoantibodies to the proteins and release of cytokines from the T cells lead to complement activation, recruitment of neutrophils (acute inflammatory cells) and the release of proteolytic enzymes. These destroy the hemidesmosomes and cause the formation of subepidermal blisters.
The association of neurological diseases with bullous pemphigoid is thought to relate to the presence of collagen XVII in the central nervous system and skin hemidesmosomes.
A rare variant of pemphigoid with IgG antibodies directed against a 200 kDa DEJ protein has been described – there is a strong association with psoriasis (laminin gamma 1).
What are the clinical features of bullous pemphigoid?
Bullous pemphigoid causes severe itch and (usually) large, tense bullae (fluid-filled blisters), which rupture forming crusted erosions.
Other variable features include:
Nonspecific rash for several weeks before blisters appear
Eczematous areas resembling nummular dermatitis
Urticaria-like red skin
Annular (ring-shaped) lesions
Smaller blisters (vesicles)
Prurigo nodules (pemphigoid nodularis)
Clear or cloudy, yellowish or bloodstained blister fluid
Postinflammatory pigmentation
Milia in healed areas
Bullous pemphigoid typically involves the flexor aspects of the limbs. It may be localised to one area, or widespread on the trunk and proximal limbs.
Frequently it affects the skin around skin folds.
Blisters inside the mouth and in genital sites are uncommon.
Some patients have a diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid made despite not having any bullae (non-bullous pemphigoid). This can affect any site on the body.
Blisters of bullous pemphigoid on foot, skin of colour
What are the complications of bullous pemphigoid?
Bullous pemphigoid can be a serious disease, particularly when widespread or resistant to treatment. Morbidity and mortality result from:
Bacterial staphylococcal and streptococcal skin infection, and sepsis
Viral infection with herpes simplex, varicella or herpes zoster
Complications of treatment
Underlying and associated diseases.
How is bullous pemphigoid diagnosed?
Pathological examination of bullous pemphigoid shows a split under the epidermis. A dermal neutrophilic infiltrate is usual but not always present. Eosinophils may be prominent.
Direct immunofluorescence staining of a skin biopsy taken adjacent to a blister highlights antibodies along the basement membrane that lies between the epidermis and dermis.
Blood tests include an indirect immunofluorescence test for circulating pemphigoid BP180 antibodies.
Other tests will relate to planning and monitoring treatment.
What is the treatment for bullous pemphigoid?
If the pemphigoid is very widespread, hospital admission may be arranged to dress blisters and erosions.
Medical treatment involves:
Ultrapotent topical steroids to treat limited disease < 10% of body surface (eg, clobetasol propionate cream)
Moderate potency topical steroids and emollients to relieve itch and dryness
Systemic steroids (eg, prednisone) – they are however associated with an increased risk of adverse and potentially fatal side effects.
Tetracycline antibiotics, usually doxycycline 200 mg/day; doxycycline has fewer adverse effects than oral corticosteroids and is effective on its own for mild disease
Other steroid-sparing medications on their own or in combination with steroids
Antibiotics for secondary bacterial infection
Most patients with bullous pemphigoid are treated with steroid tablets, either prednisone or prednisolone at an initial dose of 0.5 mg/kg/day. The dose is adjusted until the blisters have stopped appearing, which usually takes several weeks. The dose of prednisone is then slowly reduced once there are fewer than 3 significant blisters, over many months or years. As systemic steroids have many undesirable side effects, other medications are added to ensure the lowest possible dose (aiming for 5–10 mg prednisone daily). These other medications may include doxycycline or:
Intravenous immunoglobulin
People on systemic steroids may also receive additional medicines to alleviate their potential side effects (such as gastritis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and osteoporosis).
Monoclonal antibodies targeting IgE (such as omalizumab), IL-17 (such as secukinumab), IL-4, IL-13, IL-5 (mepolixumab), eotaxin-1 (bertilumumab), complement-specific serine protease C1 (sutimlimab), JAK inhibitors, and other mediators are under investigation for the treatment of bullous pemphigoid.
Assessment and monitoring
As systemic treatment may be required for bullous pemphigoid for long periods, the extent and severity of the disease should be recorded carefully at baseline and follow-up appointments. The following aspects may be considered.
Body sites affected (skin and mucous membranes)
Type of lesion: transient and non-transient
Numbers of lesions: blisters, urticarial weals, eczematous plaques
Observation point: the initial phase, active treatment, reducing treatment, maintenance phase on minimal treatment, or complete remission off treatment
The Bullous Pemphigoid Disease Area Index (BPDAI) has separate scores for skin and mucous membrane activity.
Blood pressure, body weight, DEXA bone scan, and blood tests are required to monitor therapy, as medications used for bullous pemphigoid may have serious side effects in some patients.
How can bullous pemphigoid be prevented?
It is not known how to prevent bullous pemphigoid.
What is the outlook for bullous pemphigoid?
Abdul-Halim NA, Ng HJ. Bullous pemphigoid is a common associated disorder with acquired haemophilia A. Int J Hematol. 2021;113(1):58-62. doi:10.1007/s12185-020-03002-9. PubMed
Amber KT, Feldman RJ. The safety of topical vs. oral steroids in bullous pemphigoid: considerations for retrospective analyses. Br J Dermatol. 2024;191(4):479–480. PubMed
Asdourian MS, Shah N, Jacoby TV, Reynolds KL, Chen ST. Association of Bullous Pemphigoid With Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapy in Patients With Cancer: A Systematic Review. JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158(8):933-941. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.1624 Journal
British Association of Dermatologists’ guidelines on assessing and managing bullous pemphigoid. VA Venning, K Taghipour, MF Mohd Mustapa, AS Highet and G Kirtschig, BJD, Vol. 167, No. 6, December 2012 (p1200-1214)
Chen YJ, Wu CY, Lin MW, Chen TJ, et al. Comorbidity profiles among patients with bullous pemphigoid: a nationwide population-based study. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Sep;165(3):593–9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10386.x. Epub 2011 Jul 28. PubMed
Goletz S, Probst C, Komorowski L, et al. Sensitive and specific assay for the serological diagnosis of anti-p200 pemphigoid based on the recombinant laminin β4 subunit. Br J Dermatol. 2024;191(1):140-141. Journal
Granados-Betancort E, Sánchez-Díaz M, Muñoz-Barba D, Arias-Santiago S. Omalizumab and Dupilumab for the Treatment of Bullous Pemphigoid: A Systematic Review. J Clin Med. 2024;13(16):484. PubMed
Kawsar A, Edwards C, Patel P, et al. Checkpoint inhibitor-associated bullous cutaneous immune-related adverse events: a multicentre observational study. Br J Dermatol.  2022;187(6):981-987. doi:10.1111/bjd.21836 Journal
Murrell DF, Daniel BS, Joly P, Borradori L, A et al. Definitions and outcome measures for bullous pemphigoid: recommendations by an international panel of experts. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Mar;66(3):479–85. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2011.06.032. Epub 2011 Nov 5. PubMed. PubMed Central
Planella-Fontanillas N, Bosch-Amate X, Jiménez Antón A, et al. Real-world evaluation of the effectiveness and safety of dupilumab in bullous pemphigoid: an ambispective multicentre case series. Br J Dermatol. 2025;192(3):501–509. PubMed
Singh S, Kirtschig G, Anchan VN, et al. Interventions for bullous pemphigoid. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;8(8):CD002292. PubMed
Williams HC, Wojnarowska F, Kirtschig G, Mason J, et al. UK Dermatology Clinical Trials Network BLISTER Study Group. Doxycycline versus prednisolone as an initial treatment strategy for bullous pemphigoid: a pragmatic, non-inferiority, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2017 Apr 22;389(10079):1630–8. Journal
Shen YH, Huang YC. Differences of clinical and laboratory features between dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor-related and nondipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor-related bullous pemphigoid: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 2025;93(2):499-501. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2025.02.095. Journal
Bullous pemphigoid – pathology
Childhood bullous pemphigoid
Pemphigoid gestationis
Pemphigoid nodularis
Blistering skin diseases
Cicatricial pemphigoid
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Oral blistering diseases
Direct immunofluorescence
Blistering skin conditions
Indirect immunofluorescence
International Pemphigus and Pemphigoid Foundation
Bullous pemphigoid — Medscape Reference
Pemphigoid — British Association of Dermatologists
Australasian Blistering Diseases Foundation
Pem Friends — a UK support group for pemphigoid and pemphigus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Port Wine Stain]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/port-wine-stain]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Melasma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/melasma]
Melasma (facial pigmentation)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Melasma — extra information
Chloasma, Mask of pregnancy
Pigmentary disorders
Pigmentary disorders
Authors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. 1997/2014. Updated: Dr Brent J Doolan, Dermatology Research Fellow, The Skin Hospital, Sydney NSW, Australia. Dr Monisha Gupta, Dermatologist, The Skin Hospital, Sydney NSW, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2020. Minor update December 2025.
Differential diagnoses
Melasma is a common acquired skin disorder that presents as a bilateral, blotchy, brownish facial pigmentation.
This form of facial pigmentation was previously called chloasma, but as this derives from the Greek meaning ‘to become green’, the term melasma (brown skin) is preferred. It was also known as the ‘mask of pregnancy’.
Melasma is more common in women than in men, with an onset typically between the ages of 20 and 40 years. Melasma is most common in people who tan easily or have naturally brown skin (Fitzpatrick skin phototypes III, IV). It is less common in people with fair skin (Fitzpatrick types I, II) or black skin (Fitzpatrick types V, VI).
What causes melasma?
The cause of melasma is complex; it has been proposed to be a photoageing disorder in genetically predisposed individuals. The pigmentation ultimately results from the overproduction of melanin by melanocytes (pigment cells); either taken up by keratinocytes (epidermal melanosis) and/or deposited in the dermis (dermal melanosis, melanophages).
Factors implicated in the development of melasma include:
Family history — 60% report affected family members
Sun exposure — ultraviolet and visible light promote melanin production
Hormones — pregnancy and the use of oestrogen/progesterone-containing oral contraceptives, intrauterine devices, implants, and hormone replacement therapy, are implicated in one-quarter of affected women; thyroid disorders can be associated with melasma
Medications and scented products — new targeted therapies for cancer and perfumed soaps, toiletries, and cosmetics may cause a phototoxic reaction to trigger melasma
Researchers are examining the roles of stem cell, neural, vascular, and local hormonal factors in promoting melanocyte activation.
What are the clinical features of melasma?
Melasma presents as bilateral, asymptomatic, light-to-dark brown macules or patches with irregular borders.
Distinct patterns include:
Centrofacial — forehead, cheeks, nose, upper lip (sparing the philtrum); 50-80% of presentations
Malar — cheeks, nose
Mandibular — jawline, chin
Erythosis pigmentosa faciei — reddened or inflamed
Extrafacial — forearms, upper arms, shoulders in a sun-exposed distribution.
Melasma can be separated into epidermal, dermal, and mixed types, depending on the level of increased melanin in the skin.
Epidermal melasma is defined by:
Border: well-defined
Wood lamp: appears more obvious
Dermoscopy: Scattered islands of brown reticular network with dark fine granules
Treatment: usually has a good response.
Dermal melasma is defined by:
Colour: Light brown to blue-grey
Wood lamp: no accentuation
Dermoscopy: reticuloglobular pattern, telangiectasia, arciform structures
Treatment: usually has a poor response.
Mixed melasma is the most common type, and is defined by:
Combination of blue-grey, light and dark brown colours
Mixed patterns seen with Wood lamp and dermatoscope
Treatment usually shows a partial improvement.
Melasma Melasma Melasma Melasma Melasma Melasma
What are the complications of melasma?
Melasma can have a severe impact on quality of life due to its visibility.
How is melasma diagnosed?
Melasma is usually a clinical diagnosis based on the clinical appearance, and examination with a Wood lamp and dermatoscope.
Occasionally a skin biopsy may be taken. Histology varies with the type of melasma, but typically the following features are seen:
Melanin deposited in basal and suprabasal keratinocytes
Highly dendritic (branched) intensely pigmented melanocytes
Melanin within dermal melanophages
Solar elastosis and elastic fibre fragmentation
An increase in blood vessels.
Serial photography and severity indices such as the Melasma Area and Severity Index (MASI) or modified MASI can be used to monitor response to treatment.
What is the differential diagnosis for melasma?
Other disorders that may resemble melasma clinically include:
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
Solar lentigo and other forms of lentigines and freckles
Acquired dermal macular hyperpigmentation
Drug-induced hyperpigmentation
Naevus of Ota and naevus of Hori.
What is the treatment for melasma?
A combination of measures is generally required.
Year-round, life-long sun protection — broad-brimmed hat, broad-spectrum very high protection factor (SPF50+) sunscreen containing iron oxides, and sunsmart behaviour
Discontinue hormonal contraception if possible
Cosmetic camouflage.
The most successful formulation has been a combination of hydroquinone, tretinoin, and moderate potency topical steroid (skin lightening cream) reported to clear or improve 60–80%.
Other topical agents used alone or, more commonly, in combination have included:
Many other agents are under investigation. For example, 2-mercaptonicotinoyl glycine (2-MNG), which binds to certain melanin precursors, has shown promise in early clinical trials for preventing hyperpigmentation induced by ultraviolet or visible light.
Tranexamic acid blocks conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, with downstream effects inhibiting synthesis of prostaglandin and other factors involved in melasma.
More new oral treatments are being trialled.
Procedural techniques
Chemical peels and lasers can be used with caution, but carry a risk of worsening melasma or causing post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation. Patients should be pretreated with a tyrosinase-inhibitor, such as hydroquinone.
Superficial epidermal pigment can be peeled off using alpha-hydroxy acids (AHA), such as glycolic acid, or beta-hydroxy acids (BHA), such as salicylic acid.
Microneedling, intense pulsed light (IPL), and lasers including Q-switched Nd:YAG, ablative and non-ablative fractionated and picosecond lasers carry a high risk for relapse and the disease becoming more resistant to treatment, so require expert use.
What is the outcome for melasma?
Melasma can be frustrating to treat, both for the patient and the medical practitioner. It is slow to respond to treatment, especially if it has been present for a long time.
Even in those who get a good result from treatment, pigmentation may reappear on exposure to summer sun.
The chronicity and risk for relapse with the need for lifelong sun protection should be emphasised to set realistic goals and outcomes.
Bala HR, Lee S, Wong C, Pandya AG, Rodrigues M. Oral tranexamic acid for the treatment of melasma: a review. Dermatol Surg. 2018;44(6):814–25. doi:10.1097/DSS.0000000000001518. PubMed
Boukari F, Jourdan E, Fontas E, et al. Prevention of melasma relapses with sunscreen combining protection against UV and short wavelengths of visible light: a prospective randomized comparative trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(1):189–90.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.08.023. PubMed
Handel AC, Miot LD, Miot HA. Melasma: a clinical and epidemiological review. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):771–82. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20143063. PubMed
Kheradmand M, Afshari M, Damiani G, Abediankenari S, Moosazadeh M. Melasma and thyroid disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Dermatol. 2019;58(11):1231–8. doi:10.1111/ijd.14497. PubMed
Ogbechie-Godec OA, Elbuluk N. Melasma: an up-to-date comprehensive review. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2017;7(3):305–18. doi:10.1007/s13555-017-0194-1. PubMed
Passeron T, Picardo M. Melasma, a photoaging disorder. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2018;31(4):461–5. doi:10.1111/pcmr.12684. PubMed
Rodrigues M, Pandya AG. Melasma: clinical diagnosis and management options. Australas J Dermatol. 2015;56(3):151–63. doi:10.1111/ajd.12290. PubMed
Sarma N, Chakraborty S, Poojary SA, et al. Evidence-based review, grade of recommendation, and suggested treatment recommendations for melasma. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2017;8(6):406–42. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_187_17. PubMed
Sonthalia S, Jha AK, Langar S. Dermoscopy of melasma. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2017;8(6):525–6. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_6_17. PubMed Central
Trivedi MK, Yang FC, Cho BK. A review of laser and light therapy in melasma. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017;3(1):11–20. doi:10.1016/j.ijwd.2017.01.004. PubMed Central
Skin changes in pregnancy
Melasma — Medscape Reference
Melasma — British Association of Dermatologists
Melasma: Tips for managing — American Academy of Dermatology
Melasma — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hyperpigmentation]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hyperpigmentation]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Sorry, it seems you were trying to access a page that doesn't exist.Please check the spelling of the URL you were trying to access and try again.
Try our popular pages
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: 5 Fluorouracil Cream]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/5-fluorouracil-cream]
Fluorouracil (5-FU): Drug Information – DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Fluorouracil cream — extra information
Efudix™, 5-fluorouracil cream, 5-FU cream, efudix, tolak
Treatments, Lesions (cancerous)
387172005, 326860000, 292234002, 713977002, 375521000
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2001. Updated in September 2016.
Results of treatment
What is fluorouracil cream?
Topical fluorouracil 5% cream is often abbreviated to 5-FU. The trade name in New Zealand is Efudix™ and it is a prescription medicine. It is a cytotoxic agent or antimetabolite and it is toxic to living cells, especially to certain cancer or precancerous cells. It destroys sun-damaged skin cells, so the skin appears smoother and more youthful.
In many countries, 0.5% fluorouracil cream combined with 10% salicylic acid is also available (Actikerall®).
Reaction to fluorouracil cream after 2 weeks' use on actinic keratoses
Actinic keratosis treated with fluorouracil cream Effects of fluorouracil cream applied to actinic keratoses Effect of 17 days of fluorouracil cream to actinic keratoses
How does fluorouracil work?
Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine analogue that irreversibly binds within a cell to thymidylate synthetase. This prevents the incorporation uracil into nuclear RNA, which destroys abnormal cancer cells.
What is fluorouracil used for?
Fluorouracil cream is most often prescribed to clear up actinic keratoses and intraepidermal carcinoma (in situ squamous cell carcinoma). A full-face course has been shown to substantially reduce the risk of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) developing in the treated site during the following year.
Fluorouracil is also occasionally used to treat the following skin conditions:
Superficial basal cell carcinoma
Disseminated superficial porokeratosis and linear porokeratosis.
It works best on face and scalp and is less effective on other body sites.
How should fluorouracil cream be used?
Fluorouracil cream is a powerful, destructive medication and must be used exactly as directed. Keep it locked up so other people cannot mistakenly use it to treat a rash.
Pretreatment with cryotherapy or keratolytics, such as urea cream or glycolic acid lotion, is useful to minimise scaling and permit optimum absorption of the active ingredient, 5-FU.
Fluorouracil cream is applied once or twice a day after washing with plain water. A tiny amount of the cream should be gently rubbed into all of the treatment areas with a fingertip. It is important to apply it to all the skin and not just visible lesions. Afterwards, rinse the finger thoroughly with water (or use a glove or cotton bud to apply the cream). Treatment for actinic keratoses is continued for 2 to 4 weeks. Longer may be necessary for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
The manufacturer's guidelines indicate that the maximum area to be treated at one time is 500 cm2.
Combination treatments with fluorouracil cream
Sometimes fluorouracil cream is prescribed in combination with another topical agent.
The combination of 5% fluorouracil cream with tretinoin cream works best if the tretinoin has been used for at least two weeks prior to starting fluorouracil. Tretinoin cream enhances the effect of fluorouracil by peeling off the top layer of skin. It reduces the time required for the course of fluorouracil treatment. Tretinoin cream can be continued afterwards long term to reduce the signs of skin ageing and prevent deterioration, using very careful sun protection.
Combining low-potency 0.5% fluorouracil cream with 10% salicylic acid> (Actikerall™) has also been shown to be effective for actinic keratoses on the face and hands and forearms over a 12-week course. It is especially useful for hyperkeratotic (horny) lesions.
5% fluorouracil cream with 0.005% calcipotriol ointment has been reported to improve efficacy and reduce the number of days required for treatment of actinic keratoses compared to 5% fluorouracil cream alone.
The chemowrap is left in place for 7 days, then removed. The treated skin is washed and gently scrubbed to remove loose skin and scabs. Fluorouracil treatment is repeated once weekly for 4 to 12 weeks. If treated areas become eroded, treatment is stopped and petroleum jelly is applied to the affected area. It can be recommenced if necessary.
What are the results of treatment with fluorouracil cream?
Fluorouracil cream frequently results in a mild to a severe stinging or burning sensation, depending on the sensitivity of the skin, the severity of the sun damage and how long it has been used for. After five to ten days of treatment, the sun-damaged parts of treated skin become red, scaly and tender. As treatment is continued, sores and crusts may appear. These raw areas result from the destruction of defective skin cells. They are a necessary part of treatment and are expected to heal, once the treatment is stopped.
Treated areas can be covered with a light dressing or left open. An occlusive dressing will increase penetration of 5-FU and enhance the effect and adverse reactions. Make-up can be worn if the reaction is mild, but should be avoided in the case of erosions and ulceration.
Effect of fluorouracil cream
Mild reaction after 10 days treatment to keratoses Keratoses after 2 weeks' treatment Intraepidermal carcinoma ulcerating after 3 weeks' treatment
Precautions when using fluorouracil cream
Fluorouracil cream must not be used during pregnancy because it has been shown to cause birth deformities. It is classified as Category D. It should also be avoided during breastfeeding, to minimise the chance of excretion in breast milk and subsequent risk to the nursing infant.
Avoid putting fluorouracil cream in the eyes; it is not normally used on eyelids. Keep it off the lips, unless specifically instructed to use it on this site. Use it with care in skin folds (such as those around the nose and lips), since it may irritate more severely in these areas.
Due to interaction with sunlight, it is best to use fluorouracil cream during the winter months. Treated skin should normally be very carefully protected from the sun; stay indoors during the middle part of the day. If the treated area is inadvertently exposed to the sun, the reaction to fluorouracil is more vigorous than normal.
There have been several reports of detrimental effects on pets following accidental ingestion of fluorouracil. Keep tubes out of reach, wash hands thoroughly after application, and do not allow pets to lick areas of application.
Follow up after fluorouracil treatment
After you have been instructed to stop using the fluorouracil cream, you may be prescribed a specific moisturiser or mild topical steroid< to help to heal the treated area. If you have been given no specific instructions, apply plain white petrolatum thinly to raw and crusted areas at bedtime. Stop the petrolatum when the crusts and scabs have healed.
When treatment is stopped the skin heals rapidly. It takes two to four weeks for healthy new skin to replace the sun-damaged skin destroyed by the fluorouracil cream. After healing, the treated areas are often redder than normal and may feel more sensitive; this redness and sensitivity will gradually fade over a few weeks. Occasionally it persists for several months.
Persistent or recurrent actinic keratoses can be treated with a further course of fluorouracil cream, imiquimod cream or by cryotherapy. However, it is important to ask your dermatologist if this is appropriate because skin cancers can look very similar and may need surgery or other procedures.
Complications of treatment with fluorouracil cream
The action of fluorouracil cream means that some degree of itch, pain, erosions, crusting, dermatitis and other inflammatory reactions are expected during treatment.
The following complications may occasionally occur during fluorouracil cream treatment.
Excessive local inflammatory reaction may cause ulceration, blistering and local swelling.
Phototoxic reactions develop on treated areas exposed to sunlight or another source of ultraviolet radiation.
Hypersensitivity reactions are a particular risk for patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase enzyme deficiency, who may also develop systemic toxicity.
Systemic symptoms may include fever, nausea, diarrhoea, headache and mouth ulcers (stomatitis).
Blood tests may show leukocytosis (raised white cell count) or leukopenia (reduced white cell count).
Secondary infection (impetiginisation) can occur due to bacteria penetrating eroded skin.
The following complications may follow fluorouracil cream treatment:
Persistent white marks or scarring
Undiagnosed skin cancers; ­ these may appear to heal with fluorouracil cream but recur later.
Excessive inflammatory reactions to fluorouracil cream
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Data sheet for fluorouracil cream – Medsafe New Zealand
Tallon B, Turnbull N. 5% fluorouracil chemowraps in the management of widespread lower leg solar keratoses and squamous cell carcinoma. Australas J Dermatol. 2013 Nov;54(4):313–6. doi: 10.1111/ajd.12055. Epub 2013 May 8. PubMed PMID: 23651243.
Herranz P, Morton C, Dirschka T, Azeredo RR, Roldán-Marín R. Low-Dose 0.5% 5-Fluorouracil/10% Salicylic Acid Topical Solution in the Treatment of Actinic Keratoses. J Cutan Med Surg. 2016 Nov;20(6):555-561. Review. PubMed PMID: 27443886. PubMed.
Actikerall™ (5-Fluorouracil 0.5% and Salicylic Acid 10%) Topical Solution for Patient-directed Treatment of Actinic Keratoses
Cunningham TJ, Tabacchi M, Eliane JP, Tuchayi SM, Manivasagam S, Mirzaalian H, Turkoz A, Kopan R, Schaffer A, Saavedra AP, Wallendorf M, Cornelius LA, Demehri S. Randomized trial of calcipotriol combined with 5-fluorouracil for skin cancer precursor immunotherapy. J Clin Invest. 2017 Jan 3;127(1):106-116. doi: 10.1172/JCI89820. PubMed PMID: 27869649; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5199703. PubMed.
Weinstock MA, Thwin SS, Siegel JA, et al. Chemoprevention of basal and squamous cell carcinoma with a single course of fluorouracil, 5% cream. JAMA Oncol. 2018 Jan 3. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.3631 [Epub ahead of print]. PubMed.
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe New Zealand
Fluorouracil Topical — Medline Plus
5-Fluorouracil cream — British Association of Dermatologists
Fluorouracil cream — SafeRx
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Acanthosis Nigricans]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/acanthosis-nigricans]
Acanthosis Nigricans: Causes, Diagnosis, and Treatment
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Acanthosis nigricans
Acanthosis nigricans — extra information
Pseudoacanthosis nigricans, an
Systemic diseases, Pigmentary disorders
Pigmentary disorders
Acanthosis nigricans
Last Reviewed: March, 2025
Authors: Dr. James A. Ida, MD, MS, Dermatologist, Veterans Administration, USA (2025)
Previous authors: Vanessa Ngan, DermNet Staff writer (2004); Abdullah Haroon, University of Ottawa, (2024)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet Content Department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is acanthosis nigricans?
Acanthosis nigricans is a skin condition characterised by a velvety papillomatous overgrowth of the epidermis. Darkening and thickening (epidermal hyperplasia) of the skin occurs mainly in the flexural areas, particularly the axillae, groin, inframammary region, and neck.
Acanthosis nigricans (AN) is usually a sign of an underlying metabolic or hormonal condition or disease, such as obesity or diabetes (most commonly type 2 diabetes but also reported in type 1 diabetes, particularly when associated with obesity). It may also be associated with certain drugs, such as systemic glucocorticoids or oral contraceptives. Its presence as a sign of internal malignancy (malignant AN) is very rare.
Acanthosis nigricans on the neck Axillary acanthosis nigricans Acanthosis nigricans
Who gets acanthosis nigricans?
Acanthosis nigricans affects < 1% of Caucasians. In the United States, the estimated prevalence is 13.3% among African Americans, 5.5% among Latinos, and 34.2% among Native Americans.
It affects both males and females of all ages, with people < 40 years of age typically being more affected.
Acanthosis nigricans was found in 18.2% of children and 19.5% of adults in a cross-sectional study (n=1730) in the United States. Those diagnosed with AN were twice as likely to have type 2 diabetes compared to those without (35.4% vs. 17.6%).
Rarely, AN may present as a paraneoplastic syndrome in the setting of internal malignancy. Such malignant AN tends to develop abruptly and to occur in patients who are middle-aged and not obese.
What causes acanthosis nigricans?
The exact cause of AN is still unclear. However, it is predominantly linked to states of insulin resistance (IR) wherein obesity, diabetes, and/or other metabolic disorders (eg, metabolic syndrome, polycystic ovary syndrome, and generalised lipodystrophy) co-exist. Insulin in high concentrations has been shown to cross the dermal-epidermal junction, and in high concentrations to have growth-stimulating effects through its binding to type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR) on keratinocytes. It is this activation of IGFR that stimulates the proliferation of keratinocytes and leads to AN.
Other less common presentations of AN include:
Drug-related AN, which has been associated with nicotinic acid lotion, fusidic acid ointment, subcutaneous insulin, oral contraceptives, oral corticosteroids, hormones (such as diethylstilbestrol and testosterone), triazinate, and aripiprazole
Familial AN, a rare autosomal dominant condition that presents at birth or in childhood and progresses until puberty after which it either stabilizes or regresses. It is due to a mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene
Autoimmune AN, which has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, scleroderma, and Hashimoto thyroiditis
Acral acanthotic anomaly, a presentation that typically occurs in darker skin phenotypes and is limited to the elbows, knees, and dorsal aspects of the hands and feet
Unilateral AN (also called naevoid acanthosis nigricans), a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis with lesions occurring unilaterally along Blaschko lines; it can present at any age.
A recently described presentation of AN-like lesions among darker-skinned individuals, involving the forehead, cheeks, including the malar areas, and fingers was also found to be strongly associated with obesity and metabolic disorders.
Tripe palms are a variant of malignant AN with a 90% association with internal malignancy.
What are the clinical features of acanthosis nigricans?
Acanthosis nigricans is characterised by symmetric, thickened, brown, velvety patches and plaques that appear most commonly in the intertriginous areas (ie, the axillae, groin, and back and sides of the neck). In women, the nipples and areolae of the breasts, the vulva, and the perineum may also be involved. The lesions of AN may become macerated and malodorous, and skin tags are an additional frequent finding.
Lesions affecting the mucosal surfaces of the oral cavity, nose, larynx, and oesophagus tend to be more common and more extensive in malignant acanthosis nigricans as does the finding of pruritus. Pruritus may be present and is very common in malignant acanthosis nigricans.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The skin may appear darker and more leathery in darker skin phototypes
People with skin phototypes IV, V, and VI have a higher frequency of acanthosis nigricans on the neck compared to those with skin phototypes I, II, and III, and facial acanthosis nigricans is almost exclusive to those with darker skin types
There is a very high prevalence of insulin resistance in those with light skin who have acanthosis nigricans. However, in darker skinned individuals, acanthosis nigricans may present without concurrent insulin resistance. Thus, skin phototype influences the likelihood of acanthosis nigricans being a predictor of insulin resistance.
What are the complications of acanthosis nigricans?
Cosmetic disfigurement
Psychological distress
Acanthosis nigricans is an independent risk factor for the presence of diabetes
Complications associated with underlying disease (eg, obesity-associated complications)
How is acanthosis nigricans diagnosed?
Diagnosis is made clinically, including taking a thorough review of systems, history of current and past medical conditions, family history, and medications
If there is diagnostic uncertainty, a biopsy may be performed to obtain tissue for histopathologic analysis
Abrupt onset in an individual without the typical risk factors for AN should alert the physician to the possibility of an underlying malignancy, prompting an appropriate history, physical examination, and pursuit of imaging/laboratory investigations as indicated
What is the differential diagnosis for acanthosis nigricans?
Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis, which occurs more commonly in females with a mean age of 18–21 years. Reticulation is heterogeneous (as opposed to homogeneous in acanthosis nigricans). Pigmentation is not associated with peripheral reticulation in acanthosis nigricans.
Erythrasma, which is characterised by well-demarcated red patches often with maceration and possible scaling and is found mainly in intertriginous regions. A Wood lamp exam reveals a characteristic ‘coral-red’ fluorescence pattern in erythrasma which is absent in acanthosis nigricans.
Intertrigo, which is characterised by erythematous patches or plaques, is often macerated or fissured, may show satellite pustules if complicated with candidiasis, and/or may have accompanying pruritus or tenderness. Morphology and a history of associated symptoms are helpful distinguishing features.
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH), which is distinguishable from AN due to its frequent localisation to areas of inflammation and the ability to often elicit a history of skin trauma or irritation from the patient.
Tinea versicolor, especially when hyperpigmented and presenting on the neck, may also be confused with acanthosis nigricans. Obtaining a bedside scraping of scales and seeing the characteristic “spaghetti and meatballs” yeast form pattern of tinea versicolor can be an extremely helpful distinguishing finding.
What is the treatment for acanthosis nigricans?
The mainstay for treatment is to manage the underlying disease. Patient education is also an important component.
Non-pharmacologic treatment includes lifestyle modifications, such as establishing healthy eating habits and increasing exercise with the aim of improving insulin resistance/glucose metabolism.
Pharmacologic treatment includes metformin and rosiglitazone, which are used to reduce insulin levels and moderately improve AN.
Malignant acanthosis nigricans should be addressed with careful workup and management of any underlying malignancy. Cyproheptadine has been shown to aid in the regression of malignancy-associated AN by inhibiting the release of paraneoplastic, tumour-produced factors that contribute to AN.
Resolution of drug-induced AN requires identification and withdrawal of the suspected drug(s).
Syndromic AN may be improved with treatment of the underlying syndrome, such as with the use of oral contraceptives in the setting of polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Treatment of acanthosis nigricans can also be undertaken for cosmetic reasons. Towards this end, some pharmacologic modalities include:
Keratolytic agents: salicylic acid, glycolic acid, trichloroacetic acid
Topical retinoids: adapalene gel, tretinoin cream
Omega-3 fatty acids (eg, fish oil)
Intralesional vitamin D3
Procedural modalities include:
Psoralen plus UVA (PUVA)
Long-pulsed alexandrite laser
What is the outcome for acanthosis nigricans?
Outcomes depend on the cause. Acanthosis nigricans may be a vital marker of underlying conditions which themselves carry significant risk to overall morbidity and mortality, such as obesity, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and even serious internal malignancies.
Kong AS, Williams RL, Rhyne R, Urias-Sandoval V et al.; PRIME Net Clinicians. Acanthosis Nigricans: high prevalence and association with diabetes in a practice-based research network consortium--a PRImary care Multi-Ethnic network (PRIME Net) study. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;23(4):476–85. DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2010.04.090221. PubMed Central
Kutlubay Z, Engin B, Bairamov O, Tüzün Y. Acanthosis nigricans: A fold (intertriginous) dermatosis. Clin Dermatol. 2015;33(4):466–70. DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2015.04.010. PubMed
Lopez-Alvarenga J, García-Hidalgo L, Landa-Anell M, Santos-Gómez R et al. Influence of Skin Color on the Diagnostic Utility of Clinical Acanthosis Nigricans to Predict Insulin Resistance in Obese Patients. Arch Med Res. 2006;37(6):744–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2005.12.007. PubMed
Calcaterra V, De Silvestri A, Schneider L, Acunzo M, Vittoni V, Meraviglia G, Bergamaschi F, Zuccotti G, Mameli C. Acanthosis Nigricans in Children and Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes or Obesity: The Potential Interplay Role between Insulin Resistance and Excess Weight. Children (Basel). 2021 Aug 18;8(8):710. doi: 10.3390/children8080710. PubMed
Mourad AI, Haber RM. Drug-induced acanthosis nigricans: A systematic review and new classification. Dermatol Ther. 2021;34:e14794. DOI: 10.1111/dth.14794. PubMed
Phiske MM. An approach to acanthosis nigricans. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2014 Jul;5(3):239–49. doi: 10.4103/2229-5178.137765. PMID: 25165638; PMCID: PMC4144206. PubMed
Shah VH, Rambhia KD, Mukhi JI, Singh RP, Kaswan P. Clinico-investigative Study of Facial Acanthosis Nigricans. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2022;13(2):221–8. Published 2022 Mar 3. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_855_20. PubMed
Verma S, Sandhu S, Kotwal N, Madke B, Yadav N, Vasudevan B. Review of facial acanthosis nigricans: Easy to diagnose and difficult to treat marker of hyperinsulinemia/metabolic syndrome. Med J Armed Forces India. 2024;80(3):257–69. Journal
Cutaneous markers of internal malignancy
Florid cutaneous papillomatosis
Skin problems associated with diabetes mellitus
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Acanthosis nigricans — American Academy of Dermatology Association
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Achenbach Syndrome]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/achenbach-syndrome]
Achenbach syndrome: Painful Blue Finger – DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Achenbach syndrome — extra information
Paroxysmal haematoma of the finger, Paroxysmal finger haematoma, Painful blue finger, Finger apoplexia, Acute idiopathic blue finger, Paroxysmal hand haematoma
Blood vessel problems
Blood vessel problems
Author: Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, East Lancashire NHS Trust, Lancashire, UK. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. September 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is Achenbach syndrome?
Achenbach syndrome is a paroxysmal recurring painful bruising of the finger(s) or palm, not associated with serious underlying conditions.
Achenbach syndrome: finger Achenbach syndrome: finger Achenbach syndrome: finger
Who gets Achenbach syndrome?
Achenbach syndrome has been predominantly reported in middle-aged females, with a median age of onset of 48–50 years (range 22–76).
Although said to be rare, a study of 802 members of the general population aged 18 to 84 years in three regions of France found a prevalence of 12.4% in women and 1.2% of men. It is possibly more common in those with a history of Raynaud phenomenon and chilblains, however is not associated with smoking.
What causes Achenbach syndrome?
There is no associated serious cause for easy bruising such as a clotting disorder or vascular abnormality.
What are the clinical features of Achenbach syndrome?
Achenbach syndrome characteristically follows minor trauma, although this is often not recalled.
Acute onset of pain followed minutes to hours later by discolouration, usually blue-purple.
Palmar aspect of the dominant hand is the most common site.
Second and third finger involvement is commonest, although any finger, toe, or palmar site can be affected.
Sparing of the fingertip and nail bed is characteristic.
Discolouration resolves spontaneously in 3–6 days (range 2–14 days), without going through the colour changes usually seen with a resolving bruise.
Other — swelling; itch, burning or numbness; involvement of the dorsal digit; limited movement.
Normal findings — radial and ulnar pulses; skin perfusion; skin temperature; nail bed capillaroscopy.
Achenbach syndrome: thenar eminence Achenbach syndrome: palm Achenbach syndrome: palm
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Achenbach syndrome has been reported in Caucasians and Asians. The discolouration may be less obvious in skin of colour.
What are the complications of Achenbach syndrome?
How is Achenbach syndrome diagnosed?
Achenbach syndrome is diagnosed clinically on the typical history and clinical presentation. Many patients have undergone exhaustive investigations for clotting disorders and ischaemic events, all of which are normal/negative.
What is the differential diagnosis for Achenbach syndrome?
Bruising due to clotting disorders or low platelet count
Capillary fragility due to vitamin C deficiency or amyloidosis
Vascular ischaemic events such as embolism or vascular spasm
What is the treatment for Achenbach syndrome?
Minimise known triggers
Avoid aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Elevation and cooling for swelling
There is no specific treatment.
What is the outcome for Achenbach syndrome?
Achenbach syndrome is a benign condition with spontaneous resolution of lesions without sequelae. Episodes can recur with minor trauma, with an average frequency of recurrences of 1.2 per year.
Carpentier PH, Maricq HR, Biro C, Jiguet M, Seinturier C. Paroxysmal finger haematoma--a benign acrosyndrome occurring in middle-aged women. Vasa. 2016;45(1):57–62. doi:10.1024/0301-1526/a000496. PubMed
Godoy A, Tabares AH. Achenbach syndrome (paroxysmal finger hematoma). Vasc Med. 2019;24(4):361–6. doi:10.1177/1358863X19849627 Journal
Kordzadeh A, Caine PL, Jonas A, Rhodes KM, Panayiotopolous YP. Is Achenbach's syndrome a surgical emergency? A systematic review. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2016;42(4):439–43. doi:10.1007/s00068-015-0610-0. PubMed
Ribeiro F, Aveiro M, Leal M, Valente T, Jesus G. An acute blue finger: a case of Achenbach's syndrome. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2019;6(9):001231. doi:10.12890/2019_001231. PubMed Central
Bleeding and bruising
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Thromboangiitis obliterans
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Adult Onset Dermatomyositis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/adult-onset-dermatomyositis]
Adult-onset dermatomyositis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Adult-onset dermatomyositis
Adult-onset dermatomyositis — extra information
Dermatopolymyositis in adults, Wagner-Unverricht syndrome in adults, Polymyositis with skin involvement in adults
396230008, 281358000, 402425006, 239901009, 838366009, 238935002, 296241000119107, 46696008, 247455006, 90128006
Adult-onset dermatomyositis
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Dr Sabrina Sapsford, Clinical Medical Education Fellow, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2020. Minor update November 2025.
Differential diagnoses
What is dermatomyositis?
Dermatomyositis is an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy characterised by skeletal muscle weakness and skin changes.
Who gets dermatomyositis?
Dermatomyositis is uncommon, with an annual incidence of 0.1-6 per population of 100,000. It can affect people of any race, age, and sex; however, women are affected twice as often as men, and Black Americans are more commonly affected than white Americans. It can present in children (see Juvenile dermatomyositis). The peak age group affected in adults is those aged 50–60 years.
Adult-onset dermatomyositis is strongly associated with malignancy; up to 25% of affected adults have an unknown underlying malignancy on diagnosis. The majority are adenocarcinomas.
What causes dermatomyositis in adults?
Dermatomyositis is thought to be caused by a microangiopathy affecting skin and muscle. There is a genetic predisposition to the development of dermatomyositis such as the PTPN22 gene and HLA associations identified include:
Caucasian populations: HLA DRB1*0301 and DQA1*0501
Asian populations: HLA-B7
Anti-Jo-1 antibodies: HLA DRB1*0301 and DQA1*501
Anti-Mi-2 antibodies: HLA DRB1*07 and DQA*0201.
Triggers and reported associations have included:
Medications — see Drug-induced dermatomyositis
Viral infections — enteroviruses, parvovirus B19, influenza
Silica exposure — in tradespeople.
Most patients have disease-associated autoantibodies, suggesting dermatomyositis is an autoimmune condition.
What are the clinical features of adult-onset dermatomyositis?
The skin changes of dermatomyositis will often, but not always, precede the muscle weakness. A face rash is the commonest initial skin sign, typically followed by scalp symptoms then the changes on the hands.
Cutaneous features of dermatomyositis
Characteristic skin changes of dermatomyositis include:
Heliotrope rash — bilateral lilac discolouration of the eyelids (particularly the upper eyelids) with swelling of the eyelids and skin around the eyes
Heliotrope rash Heliotrope rash Heliotrope rash
Shawl sign — fixed redness affecting the back, shoulders, chest, and neck which can become poikilodermatous
Shawl sign over the shoulder Shawl sign over the upper back
Photosensitivity — sunburn reaction over the ‘V’ area of the anterior chest, face, and other sun-exposed sites
Photosensitive rash on the upper arm Photosensitive rash on the V of chest
Gottron papules — purple papules and plaques over the tops of the small joints of the hands
Gottron papules over the joints of the hands Gottron papules over finger joints Violaceous hue of Gottron papules
Gottron sign — redness over the backs of the hands, elbows, and knees
Gottron sign over the knees Gottron sign over the elbow Gottron sign over a knee
Scalp involvement — itchy scaly scalp with inflammation and diffuse, non-scarring thinning of the hair, and sometimes poikiloderma
Scaly scalp in dermatomyositis Scaly scalp with hair thinning in dermatomyositis
Nailfold changes — ragged cuticles and red nailfolds; dermoscopy demonstrates prominent blood vessels in the proximal nailfolds
Loss of cuticles with nailfold redness and Gottron papules Ragged cuticles and nailfold redness Nailfold dermoscopy showing dilated capillaries
Holster sign – redness over the buttocks and lateral thighs
Mechanic’s hands — hyperkeratotic changes seen in antisynthetase syndrome
Vesicles and bullae (blisters)
Calcinosis cutis — uncommon in adult-onset dermatomyositis (10%)
Mouth ulcers — ovoid palatal patch may be specific to antisynthetase dermatomyositis
Calcinosis cutis White phase of Raynaud phenomenon Raynaud phenomenon in dermatomyositis
Myositis of dermatomyositis
Muscle weakness may appear at the same time as the skin rashes, or it may occur weeks, months, or even years later. Amyopathic dermatomyositis presents with only skin changes and no clinical evidence of myositis, although this is usually found on investigation. The myositis usually affects the proximal muscles, those closest to the trunk as in the upper arms and thighs. The first indication of myositis is when the following every day movements become difficult with weakness and fatigue:
Climbing stairs or walking
Rising from a sitting or crouching position
Raising arms above the shoulders, such as when combing hair
Difficulty swallowing.
The muscles may ache and become tender to touch.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The heliotrope rash around the eyes characteristic of dermatomyositis can be difficult to distinguish in dark skin. Other clinical signs may be required to suggest the diagnosis.
Dermatomyositis of the hands Heliotrope rash of the eyelids Nailfold changes in dermatomyositis
What are the complications of adult-onset dermatomyositis?
When dermatomyositis affects swallowing, it may be complicated by:
Aspiration pneumonia.
Other systemic features of dermatomyositis may include:
Interstitial lung disease
Pulmonary arterial hypertension.
How is adult-onset dermatomyositis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of dermatomyositis is suggested by the clinical features, and confirmed on investigations.
A skin biopsy of the rash shows an interface dermatitis similar to cutaneous lupus erythematosus, so histology alone cannot be used to distinguish the two conditions. Dermoscopy or trichoscopy may also be used for closer inspection.
Blood tests assess the myositis and autoantibody subsets.
Muscle enzymes — creatine kinase (CK), aldolase, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and lactic dehydrogenase (LH).
Anti-aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetase antibodies — anti-Jo-1, anti-OJ, anti-EJ, anti-KS, anti-Zo, anti-Ha, anti-PL-1 are associated with antisynthetase syndrome.
Anti Mi-2 is associated with disease mainly affecting the skin.
Anti-transcriptional intermediary factor 1y antibodies (TIF-1y, anti 155/140) are strongly associated with malignancy-related dermatomyositis in the elderly.
Anti-melanocyte differentiation-associated protein 5 (anti-MDA5) is associated with rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease and skin ulcers.
Anti-NXP2 (MJ) antibody is associated with pronounced muscle symptoms and less with skin changes.
Further investigation of the muscle disease may require:
Electromyography (EMG)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Age-appropriate investigations for an underlying malignancy should be considered after careful history and general examination. Low risk individuals should have basic blood and urine screening, and a plain chest X ray. Intermediate and high risk individuals should, in addition, receive a CT neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis, pelvic and transvaginal ultrasound, cervical smear, mammography, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) test and faecal occult blood test (FOBT).
What is the differential diagnosis for adult-onset dermatomyositis?
Dermatomyositis may need to be distinguished from:
Other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, such as polymyositis or inclusion body myositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and other connective tissue diseases.
What is the treatment for adult-onset dermatomyositis?
General measures for the treatment of dermatomyositis include:
Photoprotection and sun-avoidance as ultraviolet radiation exposure can exacerbate cutaneous symptoms.
Physical therapy and activity
Elevating the bedhead for those with difficulty swallowing.
Measures for more specific treatment of dermatomyositis can include:
Topical calcineurin inhibitors
Systemic corticosteroid such as prednis(ol)one
Hydroxychloroquine, although cutaneous adverse effects are more common in dermatomyositis than in SLE
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), FDA-approved in 2021
Steroid-sparing agents and other immunosuppressants, including:
Mycophenolate mofetil
Biological treatments.
Diltiazem and colchicine may reduce calcinosis.
The JAK inhibitor, baricitinib, was studied in a small, 12-patient, open-label trial with clinically significant improvement seen in as early as week 4 of the study. There is a single report of deucravacitinib, another JAK inhibitor, clearing the rash of amyopathic dermatomyositis. Upadacitinib has been used in recalcitrant dermatomyositis.
Apremilast was studied in 8 adult women as add-on therapy with positive results.
Dazukibart, a monoclonal antibody targeting interferon β (IFNβ), demonstrated pronounced reduction of both muscle and skin disease in dermatomyositis in a phase II trial. Anifrolumab, a type-1 interferon receptor blocker, has proved useful in several case reports.
What is the outcome for adult-onset dermatomyositis?
Dermatomyositis may resolve in 20% of adults who have the condition, but most will require lifelong treatment. The prognosis of those with associated conditions such as malignancy, heart or lung involvement will be impacted and may be life-shortening.
Bailey EE, Fiorentino DF. Amyopathic dermatomyositis: definitions, diagnosis, and management. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2014;16(12):465. doi:10.1007/s11926-014-0465-0. PubMed
Bitar C, Ninh T, Brag K, et al. Apremilast in Recalcitrant Cutaneous Dermatomyositis: A Nonrandomized Controlled Trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158(12):1357–1366. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.3917  Journal
Cobos GA, Femia A, Vleugels RA. Dermatomyositis: an update on diagnosis and treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2020;21(3):339–53. doi:10.1007/s40257-020-00502-6. PubMed
DeWane ME, Waldman R, Lu J. Dermatomyositis: clinical features and pathogenesis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(2):267–81. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309. PubMed
Fiorentino, D., Mangold, A. R., Werth, V. P., Christopher-Stine, L., Femia, A., Chu, M., Musiek, A. C. M., Sluzevich, J. C., Graham, L. v, Fernandez, A. P., Aggarwal, R., Rieger, K., Page, K. M., Li, X., Hyde, C., Rath, N., Sloan, A., Oemar, B., Banerjee, A., … Vleugels, R. A. (2025). Efficacy, safety, and target engagement of dazukibart, an IFNβ specific monoclonal antibody, in adults with dermatomyositis: a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. The Lancet, 405(10473), 137–146. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02071-3. Journal
Okiyama N, Fujimoto M. Cutaneous manifestations of dermatomyositis characterized by myositis-specific autoantibodies. F1000Res. 2019;8:F1000 Faculty Rev-1951. doi:10.12688/f1000research.20646.1. PubMed Central
Papadakis MA, McPhee SJ, Rabow MW. Dermatomyositis. In: Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment 2020, 59th edn, Lange, 2020: 864–7.
Sasaki H, Kohsaka H. Current diagnosis and treatment of polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Mod Rheumatol. 2018;28(6):913–21. doi:10.1080/14397595.2018.1467257. PubMed
Soares RB, Gabr JB, Ash M, et al. Anifrolumab in Refractory Dermatomyositis and Antisynthetase Syndrome. Case Rep Rheumatol. 2025;2025:5560523. Published 2025 Apr 21. doi:10.1155/crrh/5560523. Pubmed Central
Stone CJ, Faden DF, Xie L, et al. Application of Risk-Based Cancer Screening in Patients With Dermatomyositis. JAMA Dermatol. 2024;160(11):1248-1251. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.3355. PubMed
Thompson C, Piguet V, Choy E. The pathogenesis of dermatomyositis. Br J Dermatol. 2018;179(6):1256–62. doi:10.1111/bjd.15607. PubMed
Waldman R, DeWane ME, Lu J. Dermatomyositis: diagnosis and treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(2):283–96. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2019.05.105. PubMed
Zhao Q, Zhu Z, Fu Q, et al. Baricitinib for the treatment of cutaneous dermatomyositis: A prospective, open-label study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;87(6):1374-1376. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2022.08.025 Journal
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Antisynthetase syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Trichoscopy of inflammatory conditions
Dermatomyositis — Medscape
The Myositis Association
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Allergic Contact Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/allergic-contact-dermatitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Last Reviewed: August, 2025
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand (1997); updated by Dr Rianet Post, Dermatologist, Stafford, United Kingdom (2016); minor update by Dr James Séamus Fuller, Dermatology Research Fellow, Skin Health Institute, Melbourne, Australia (2025)Peer reviewed by: Dr Jonathan Haddad, Great Western Hospital, United Kingdom (2025)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department.
Differential diagnoses
It is more common in women than men, primarily due to increased exposure to potential allergens such as:
Acrylates, which are widely used in nail cosmetics
Children are also at an increased risk of nickel allergy, partly due to an immature skin barrier and increased prevalence of atopic dermatitis.
Only a small number of people react to the specific allergen, which is harmless to those who are not allergic to it. This is because the person has become sensitised to the allergen, meaning it will trigger an immune response.
Factors that increase the likelihood of sensitisation include:
Chemical factors eg, chemical size and concentration.
Skin factors eg, skin disease, skin condition and integrity.
Exposure factors eg, duration, frequency, and environmental conditions.
The typical appearance is often a well-demarcated pruritic eczematous eruption, which may be acute (blistering, weeping, and/or oedematous) or chronic (lichenified or scaly plaques).
Nickel in jewellery and piercings.
Fragrances in perfumes and household items.
Rosin in adhesive plasters.
Paraphenylenediamine in permanent hair dye — causes swelling and blistering of the face and neck.
Rubber accelerator chemicals used in the manufacture of rubber gloves.
Methylisothiazolinone as a preservative in wash-off hair products and baby wipes — often causes an itchy red face.
Acrylates in hair extensions and nail cosmetics — can result in fingertip dermatitis.
Acrylates in dental implants.
Topical medications eg, antibiotics — cause localised blistering at the site of the application.
Plants eg, poison ivy or the Japanese wax tree Toxicodendron succedaneum — cause swelling and blistering on exposed sites.
Examples of photoallergy include:
Dermatitis due to a sunscreen chemical, affecting the top but not the under surface of the arm
Dermatitis of the face, neck, arms, and hands due to antibacterial soap.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
In patients with darker skin, positive patch tests:
Often appear with lichenification and hyperpigmentation, rather than erythema and vesicles
Appear violaceous or faint pink, rather than bright red or pink.
Post-inflammatory pigmentary changes, including both hypo- and hyperpigmentation, are more common in people with darker Fitzpatrick skin types, which can lead to significant psychological distress.
Patients can also perform open application tests. This is done by applying the suspected product to a small area of sensitive skin (eg, inner aspect of upper arm) multiple times daily over several days, and then observing for a reaction. It can be done after patch testing to determine whether positive patch results lead to clinically significant reactions to products.
Other tests include:
Fungal scrapings of skin for microscopy and culture can exclude fungal infection.The dimethylglyoxime test is available to ‘spot test’ if a product contains nickel.
A positive patch test to a piece of a suspect rubber glove 48 hrs after application on the skin
This is a form of dermatitis due to irritation or repetitive injury to the skin.
Its mechanism differs from allergen exposure, the latter of which is immune-mediated.
Irritants include water, soaps, detergents, solvents, acids, alkalis, and friction.
Rash appears within minutes of exposure and fades away within minutes to hours.
Infections eg, fungal infections, soft tissue infections (eg, erysipelas, cellulitis), scabies, and impetigo.
Identification and avoidance of offending allergens and potential cross-reacting agents is the principal management strategy.
Precisely identify causative allergens by having comprehensive patch tests.
Identify where the allergen is found by reading product labels — note that many chemicals have several names eg, acrylic acid is also known as propene acid and acroleic acid.
Be aware of cross-reactions eg, individuals allergic to nickel may also react to cobalt.
Wear appropriate gloves to protect hands from touching allergenic materials. Some chemicals will penetrate certain gloves; seek the advice of a safety expert. Cotton gloves can be worn underneath rubber or leather gloves to prevent reaction to rubber accelerators and chromate.
Seek dermatology input for further advice.
Active dermatitis is usually treated with the following:
Topical or oral antibiotics for secondary infection
Phototherapy or photochemotherapy.
Azathioprine, ciclosporin, or another immunosuppressive agent
Tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus cream
Retinoids for hyperkeratotic palmar involvement — Alitretinoin is approved for the treatment of chronic hand eczema.
Sensitisation is usually life long. The prognosis is usually good and depends on patient education, adherence to allergen avoidance, and the treatment of active dermatitis.
Patch tests | Open application test
Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre, Australia
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Angular Cheilitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/angular-cheilitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Angular cheilitis — extra information
Angular cheilosis, Angular stomatitis, Perleche
266429005, 278521000, 707240008, 235137005, 707245003, 707753007
Author: Dr Zsófia Sára Hermann, Hutt Hospital, NZ (2022)Previous contributors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2010)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is angular cheilitis?
Angular cheilitis is a common, non-contagious, inflammatory condition affecting the corners of the mouth or oral commissures.
Depending on the underlying cause, it may last a few days or persist indefinitely. It is also called angular stomatitis, cheilosis, rhagades, or perleche (perlèche).
Bilateral angular cheilitis with grey maceration at the angles of the mouth (AC-patient1)An edentulous woman with redness and oozing in the lateral oral creases due to angular cheilitis (AC-patient2)Crusting, oozing, and redness on the angle of the mouth Angular cheilitis in skin of colour Angular cheilitis in a denture wearer Redness and erosion of the lateral oral skin folds in an edentulous woman
Who gets angular cheilitis?
Angular cheilitis is common and can affect any child or adult. Those with poor health are especially susceptible.
Risk factors include:
Dry chapped lips of any cause
Oral thrush — this is more likely to occur in infancy, old age, diabetics, concurrent corticosteroid use or antibiotic use, and immunocompromised patients
Dentures (especially if ill-fitted and there is associated gum recession)
Poor nutrition — coeliac disease, iron deficiency, riboflavin deficiency, general protein deficiency, zinc deficiency, vitamin B12 and/or folate deficiency
Systemic illness, particularly inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease) and Sjogren syndrome
Sensitive skin, especially atopic dermatitis
Genetic predisposition — eg, in Down syndrome
Oral retinoid medication — can cause dry lips, eg, isotretinoin, acitretin
Rapid weight loss — leads to reduced skin turgor/elasticity and increased skin folds
Smoking — reduces skin turgor/elasticity
Retrognathia (abnormal posterior/set-back position of the jaw)
An overhang of the upper lip resulting in deep furrows (marionette lines).
It is made worse by licking the lips.
What causes angular cheilitis?
Angular cheilitis occurs at the angles of the mouth where two different types of skin lining meet and act as a hinge. The lining of the oral cavity (oral mucosa) meets with squamous epithelium (facial skin). As they are used often for eating, drinking, and talking, they are vulnerable to stress/trauma.
What are the clinical features of angular cheilitis?
Angular cheilitis may result in the following symptoms and signs at the corners of the mouth:
Painful cracks/fissures worse on mouth opening
Blisters, erosions, oozing, crusting
It is usually bilateral and symmetrical, however, it can occur on one side. It may progress to more widespread impetigo or candidiasis (oral thrush) on the adjacent skin and elsewhere.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Angular cheilitis in dark skin may be more subtle in the initial stages, or the skin may appear pale rather than reddened. The pale areas of skin may also be surrounded by a darkened rim.
What are the complications of angular cheilitis?
Rarely, if chronic or left untreated, angular cheilitis can cause permanent scarring and discolouration of the skin.
If the cause is a bacterial infection, there is a risk of the infection spreading to nearby skin.
Risk of subsequent infection such as fungal infection, oral thrush.
How is angular cheilitis diagnosed?
Angular cheilitis is diagnosed clinically based on history and examination.
The culture of swabs taken from the corners of the mouth may reveal:
Staphylococcus aureus
Herpes simplex (cold sores).
Skin biopsy is not usually necessary.
What is the differential diagnosis for angular cheilitis?
Seborrheic dermatitis
Secondary syphilis/syphilitic papule (more likely unilateral)
Early or isolated diffuse cheilitis
Erosive oral lichen planus
What is the treatment for angular cheilitis?
Improved general hydration
Use of lip balm or a thick emollient ointment applied frequently (often sufficient treatment alone for saliva-induced angular cheilitis)
Depending on the specific cause, oral and topical treatment options include:
Topical antifungal cream
Oral antifungal medication
Topical or oral antistaphylococcal antibiotic
Topical steroid ointment if the skin is significantly inflamed.
How do you prevent angular cheilitis?
Education around reduced licking of the lips
Nutritional supplements
Quitting smoking of cigarettes
Replacement of ill-fitted dentures to normalise face contour and reduce the size of mouth furrows
Use of topical emollients/lip balm to keep lips from being too dry
Rinsing the mouth after use of inhaled corticosteroids
Maintaining good oral and denture hygiene
Filler injections or implants to build up the oral commissures
Improved blood glucose control in those with diabetes mellitus
Botulinum toxin to smooth out mouth furrows
What is the outcome for angular cheilitis?
Repeat occurrences of angular cheilitis are common, especially in those with non-modifiable risk factors.
Ayesh MH. Angular cheilitis induced by iron deficiency anemia. Cleve Clin J Med. 2018;85(8):581-582. doi:10.3949/ccjm.85a.17109. Journal
Devi S, Duraisamy R. Prevalence of Angular Cheilitis and Assessment of Factors Associated with It - A Retrospective Study. Indian Journal of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology. 2020;14(4):5947–54. doi:10.37506/ijfmt.v14i4.12535. Journal
Federico JR, Basehore BM, Zito PM. Angular Cheilitis. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; December 21, 2021. Book
Pandarathodiyil A, Anil S, Vijayan S. Angular Cheilitis - An Updated Overview of the Etiology, Diagnosis, and Management. International Journal of Dentistry and Oral Science. 2021;8(2):1433–8. doi:10.19070/2377-8075-21000317. Journal
Stoopler ET, Nadeau C, Sollecito TP. How do I manage a patient with angular cheilitis?. J Can Dent Assoc. 2013;79:d68. Journal
Conditions affecting the mouth
Angular Cheilitis — Primary Care Dermatology Society
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Aphthous Ulcer]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/aphthous-ulcer]
Aphthous ulceration (aphthae, ulcers)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Aphthous ulcer — extra information
Aphthae, Aphthosis, Aphthous stomatitis, Canker sore
K12.0, N76.6, N50.8, N77.0
DA01.10, GA00.3, GA41.0, GA41.Y
427617000, 426965005, 398870000, 196531008, 307772002, 319297003, 426567008, 70718000, 402708008
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Chief Editor, January 2016. DermNet Revision April 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is an aphthous ulcer?
An aphthous ulcer is the most common ulcerative condition of the oral mucosa, and presents as a painful punched-out sore on oral or genital mucous membranes. They are also called aphthae, aphthosis, aphthous stomatitis and canker sores.
Who gets aphthous ulcers?
Anyone can get an aphthous ulcer; 20% of the population have one or more, at least occasionally. They usually first appear in childhood or adolescence, and more commonly affect females than males.
Aphthous ulcers can be an early manifestation of a systemic disease such as Behçet disease, or gastrointestinal disorders including coeliac disease, Crohn disease, and ulcerative colitis. Aphthous stomatitis is a feature of the recurrent fever syndrome PFAPA syndrome.
Interestingly, smoking may be protective against aphthae, even though smoking makes many oral and skin conditions worse.
What causes an aphthous ulcer?
The exact reason why aphthous ulcer develops is not yet clearly defined. Approximately 40% of people who get aphthous ulcers have a family history of aphthous ulcers. Current thinking is that the immune system is disturbed by some external factor and reacts abnormally against a protein in mucosal tissue.
Factors that seem to trigger outbreaks of ulcers include:
Emotional stress and lack of sleep
Mechanical trauma, for example, self-inflicted bite
Nutritional deficiency, particularly of vitamin B, iron, and folic acid
Certain foods, including chocolate
Certain toothpastes; this may relate to sodium laureth sulphate (the foaming component of toothpaste)
Certain medications, including nicorandil, given for angina
What are the clinical features of an aphthous ulcer?
An aphthous ulcer is typically a solitary round or oval punched-out sore or ulcer inside the mouth on an area where the mucosa is not tightly bound to the underlying bone, such as on the inside of the lips and cheeks or underneath the tongue. Aphthous ulcers can also affect the genitalia in males and females.
Recurrent aphthous ulcer usually begins as a round yellowish elevated spot surrounded by a red halo. This then breaks down into a punched-out ulcer, which is covered with a loosely attached white, yellow, or greyish membrane. Surrounding tissue is healthy and unaffected. The ulcer can be painful, particularly if irritated by movement or eating certain types of food such as citrus fruit.
People may experience a single ulcer or multiple ulcers. Multiple ulcers tend to be widely distributed throughout a person's mouth.
Aphthous ulceration is classified into three types.
Recurrent minor aphthous ulcer (80%). This is less than 5 mm in diameter and heals within 1–2 weeks.
Major aphthous ulcer, which is large (often more than 10 mm) and takes weeks or months to heal and leaves a scar.
Herpetiform ulcers, which are multiple pinpoint ulcers that heal within a month. These are most commonly on the tongue.
Minor aphthous ulcers
Aphthous ulcer Aphthous ulceration Aphthous ulceration
How is aphthous ulcer diagnosed?
Aphthous ulcers are usually diagnosed clinically. Investigations are rarely required, but are undertaken if there are recurrent attacks of multiple or severe oral ulcers or complex aphthosis.
Blood tests may include:
Blood count, iron, vitamin B12, and folate studies
Gluten antibody tests for coeliac disease
Faecal calprotectin test for Crohn disease.
Swabs for microbiology evaluate the presence of Candida albicans, Herpes simplex virus and Vincent's organisms.
What is the differential diagnosis of aphthous ulcer?
Other causes of mouth ulcer should be considered, including:
Herpes simplex, hand foot and mouth disease, and other viral infections
Fixed drug eruption.
Differential diagnosis of oral aphthous ulcer
Hand foot and mouth disease Fixed drug eruption Herpangina
What is the treatment for an aphthous ulcer?
There is no cure for an aphthous ulcer and the ulcers heal spontaneously. The main goal of treatment is to lessen pain and discomfort and promote healing.
Protective pastes that form a barrier over the ulcer so that exposure to irritating substances is reduced.
Superficial tissue cauterisation using silver nitrate stick.
Local anaesthetics benzocaine and lignocaine (lidocaine) to reduce pain.
Medicated toothpaste without sodium laureth sulphate.
Antibacterial mouthwashes to reduce secondary infection.
Avoidance of foods that trigger or exacerbate the ulcers.
Treatment of an associated condition or underlying cause, for example -
Dietary supplements of vitamins or minerals, if the diet is inadequate or a deficiency is identified.
Reduction in stress.
Prescribed medicines for aphthous ulcer
Topical prescription medicines are rarely required:
Tetracycline suspension as a mouthwash
Topical corticosteroids as lotions, creams or paste eg, triamcinolone in dental paste
Calcineurin inhibitors: topical pimecrolimus or tacrolimus.
Tetracycline eg, doxycycline 50-100mg daily for 3-6 months or longer
Immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine, methotrexate, ciclosporin
What is the outcome of an aphthous ulcer?
Most recurrent minor aphthous ulcers heal within 1–2 weeks without scarring without any treatment. Minor aphthous ulcers commonly recur intermittently.
Recurrent aphthous ulcers are mostly a minor nuisance, but they are associated with significant health problems in some people.
Major aphthous ulcer heals with scarring.
Akintoye SO, Greenberg MS. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Dent Clin North Am. 2014;58(2):281–97. PubMed Central doi:10.1016/j.cden.2013.12.002
Al-Maweri SA, Halboub E, Ashraf S, et al. Single application of topical doxycycline in management of recurrent aphthous stomatitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the available evidence. BMC Oral Health. 2020;20(1):231. doi:10.1186/s12903-020-01220-5. Journal
Cui RZ, Bruce AJ, Rogers RS 3rd. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Clin Dermatol. 2016;34(4):475-81. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.02.020. PubMed
Giannetti L, Murri Dello Diago A, Lo Muzio L. Recurrent aphtous stomatitis. Minerva Stomatol. 2018;67(3):125-8. doi:10.23736/S0026-4970.18.04137-7. PubMed
Kolios AGA, Yawalkar N, Feusi A, Kündig T, Boyman O, Nilsson J. Apremilast in treatment-refractory recurrent aphthous stomatitis. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(20):1975-7. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1901987.  Journal
Letsinger JA, McCarty MA, Jorizzo JL. Complex aphthosis: a large case series with evaluation algorithm and therapeutic ladder from topicals to thalidomide. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;52(3 Pt 1):500-8. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2004.10.863. PubMed
Differential diagnosis of vulval ulcers
Non-sexually acquired genital ulceration
Oral manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease
Aphthous Ulcers — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Athletes Foot]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/athletes-foot]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Athlete's foot — extra information
Interdigital intertrigo
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2003.
Differential diagnoses
What is athlete's foot?
Athlete's foot is a term often used to describe a fungal infection (or dermatophytosis) of the foot (tinea pedis).
It most often results in peeling skin and fissuring between the toes (the toe clefts). The cleft between the fourth and fifth toes is the most frequently affected.
Fungal infection is not the only reason for peeling and fissuring between the toes, and the term athlete's foot is sometimes used to refer to any condition where the toe clefts are inflamed.
Athlete foot Athlete foot Athlete foot
What causes athlete's foot?
Athlete's foot is generally due to proliferation of dermatophyte fungi of the genera Trichophyton rubrum, Trichophyton interdigitale, and Epidermophyton floccosum.
Predisposing factors
Athlete's foot is more common in those who participate in sports because:
They may wear occlusive footwear
They may fail to dry their feet carefully after showering
They are exposed to fungal spores on the surfaces of communal areas.
What are the clinical features of athlete's foot?
The clinical features of athlete's foot may include:
Moist, peeling skin between the toes
White, yellow, or greenish discolouration
Sometimes, thickened skin
Athlet's foot is generally mild; very inflamed athlete's foot is generally due to secondary bacterial infection.
How is athlete's foot diagnosed?
The diagnosis is usually clinical, as athlete's foot has a characteristic appearance. If resistant to treatment, investigations are undertaken to identify a specific infection.
Scrapings for fungal microscopy and culture
Swabs for bacterial microscopy and culture
Wood's light (ultraviolet) examination looking for coral-red fluorescence, characteristic of erythrasma
What is the differential diagnosis of athlete's foot?
Athlete's foot is a localised interdigital form of intertrigo.
Apart from tinea pedis, peeling and fissuring between the toes can be due to:
Yeast infection (candida)
Bacterial infection (erythrasma, pseudomonas, staphylococci and streptococci)
Soft corn (build-up of thick skin due the repetitive trauma of the toes pressing against each other)
Injury, for example over-vigorous removal of peeling skin
A skin condition, such as psoriasis (scaly patches in scalp, on elbows and knees or rashes in body folds), foot eczema or keratolysis exfoliativa.
Non-fungal causes of athlete's foot
Pseudomonas infection Psoriasis Eczema
What is the treatment of athlete's foot?
Treatment for athlete's foot should begin with general measures.
Dry carefully between the toes.
Use a dusting powder to keep the affected area dry.
Keep toes apart using a cotton or foam wedge.
Wear shoes that are loose around the toes or go bare foot.
Apply a topical antifungal agent. These may also control many of the bacteria that live in the moist skin between the toes.
Whitfield ointment (3% salicylic acid, 6% benzoic acid in petrolatum) is particularly useful, as it removes the surface layer of moist peeling skin (ie, it is keratolytic), and it eliminates bacteria and fungi.
Make sure that other sites of fungal infection are also treated effectively.
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Athlete's Foot– Medline Plus
Tinea pedis – Medscape Reference
Patient information: Ringworm, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (The Basics) – UpToDate (for subscribers)
Patient information: Ringworm (including athlete's foot and jock itch) (Beyond the Basics) – UpToDate (for subscribers)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Bacterial Skin Infections]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/bacterial-skin-infections]
Bacterial Skin Infections (bacteria) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Bacterial skin infections
Bacterial skin infections — extra information
Bacterial dermatologic disorders, Bacterial infections of skin, Systemic bacterial infections with skin manifestations
128936008, 275441009, 238417000, 721267000
Bacterial skin infections
Last reviewed: May 2023
Author(s): Nataki Duncan MPH, MHS, Meharry Medical College, USA; Dr Libby Whittaker, DermNet Staff Writer, New Zealand (2023)Previous contributors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2002)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What are bacterial skin infections?
Skin infections can be caused by bacteria (often Staphylococcal or Streptococcal) either invading normal skin, or affecting a compromised skin barrier (eg, skin affected by atopic dermatitis, or surgical wound sites).
The skin is our first line of protection against the environment. A local or systemic response is activated when this protective barrier is invaded. Microorganisms that invade the skin can be part of the external environment or the normal skin microbiome.
Honey-coloured crusts on the chin in impetigo A swollen tender hot left leg due to Streptococcal cellulitis Interdigital and toe pitted keratolysis Ecthyma gangrenosum due to Pseudomonas septicaemia Palmar erythematous macules suggestive of secondary syphilis Sporotrichoid spreading Mycobacterium marinum infection
Who gets bacterial skin infections?
Bacterial skin infections are a common reason for emergency visits. Children under five years and adults over 65 years old are affected more often than other age groups. In 2005, the World Health Organisation (WHO) reported a high prevalence of skin disease in children from developing countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
Certain comorbid conditions increase susceptibility to bacterial skin infections, such as diabetes, vascular insufficiency, and being immunocompromised (eg, chemotherapy patients with neutropaenia). Some people, such as those who inject drugs, are at increased risk. Among hospitalised patients, skin infections are prevalent and often complicate the hospital course.
What causes bacterial skin infections?
A variety of bacteria can cause skin infections, most commonly Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species.
Table 1. Which bacteria cause skin infection?
Mucocutaneous infections (or infections with skin signs)
Staphylococcus aureus (common)
Furunculosis (boils) and abscesses
Impetigo (school sores) and ecthyma
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Toxic shock syndrome
Tropical pyomyositis
Botryomycosis (pyoderma vegetans)
Streptococcus pyogenes (common)
Necrotising fasciitis
Rheumatic fever, erythema marginatum
Corynebacterium species
Trichomycosis axillaris
Meningococcal disease
Erysipelothrix insidiosa
Chancroid and cellulitis in young children
A cause of stomach infection; may be associated with:
Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
A cause of pneumonia; may be associated with:
Non-specific erythema
Stevens–Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN; rare)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Gram-negative folliculitis
Chronic paronychia (green nail syndrome)
Spa pool folliculitis
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Clostridium perfringens
Listeria monocytogenes
Cutaneous listeriosis (rare)
Bacillary angiomatosis
Mycobacterium species
Atypical mycobacterial infection including Buruli ulcer
Leptospirosis can cause purpura
Bubonic plague: lymphadenopathy and skin pustules, ulcers, and scabs
Serratia marcescens (a facultative anaerobic gram-negative bacillus)
May rarely cause skin infections such as cellulitis, abscesses, and ulcers (usually in patients with immunodeficiency)
Fusobacterium species (eg, Bacillus fusiformis, Treponema vincenti)
Burkholderia species
Melioidosis and glanders: abscesses may be associated with systemic symptoms
Actinomycosis: granular bacteriosis occurs, with abscesses and sinus tracts draining sulphur-yellow granules
A cause of septic shock characterised by blood-filled blisters
Brucellosis, a febrile illness caught from unvaccinated animals or their unpasteurised milk.
Salmonella species (eg, Salmonella typhi)
Aeromonas species (found in water)
(Rarely) cause skin and soft tissue infections
Tick-borne bacterial infections
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Babesia microti (relapsing fever)
Francisella tularensis (tularaemia)
Rickettsial diseases (some also transmitted by body lice, fleas, mosquitoes, and mites)
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
Other conditions sometimes caused by or associated with bacterial infection include:
Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome)
Folliculitis barbae (shaving bumps)
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions (bacterial endocarditis)
Vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis.
What are the clinical features of bacterial skin infections?
Bacterial skin infections can result in diverse clinical presentations. Generally, they will present with erythema, pain, warmth, swelling, and, depending on severity, dysfunction. Purulent discharge and lymphadenopathy may also be evident on examination.
In severe infections, the following signs may be present:
Temperature instability (higher than 38⁰C or lower than 35⁰C)
Altered mental status
Rapid progression of infection
Haemorrhagic or violaceous bullae
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Erythema may be less evident in darker skin tones, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is more common.
What are the complications of bacterial skin infections?
Sepsis (can be life-threatening)
Scarring or postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
Rheumatic fever (may result from Streptococcal skin infection)
Infections due to resistant bacteria (eg, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus/MRSA) may be more difficult to treat.
How are bacterial skin infections diagnosed?
Bacterial skin infection is commonly diagnosed clinically, although laboratory studies may be useful, such as:
Full blood count: bacterial infection often raises the white cell and neutrophil count
C-reactive protein (CRP): elevated >50 in serious bacterial infections (note there can be a delay of >24 hours between onset of symptoms and CRP rise)
Procalcitonin: blood test marker for generalised sepsis due to bacterial infection
Blood culture: if fever (>38⁰C)
Swab of the skin lesion/s sent for microscopy, culture, and sensitivities.
What is the differential diagnosis for bacterial skin infection?
Superficial thrombophlebitis
Deep venous thrombosis
Viral skin infection
Fungal skin infection
How do you prevent bacterial skin infections?
Regular hand washing, especially before and after touching broken skin.
General lifestyle factors to improve overall health and immune function (eg, weight management if overweight or underweight, smoking cessation, reducing alcohol intake).
Optimising management of other medical conditions (eg, diabetic control).
Maintaining skin barrier (eg, through appropriate management of atopic dermatitis, and skin irritant/allergen avoidance).
What is the treatment for bacterial skin infections?
Minor bacterial infections often resolve without treatment. Due to increasing antibiotic resistance, first-line use of topical antibiotics, such as fusidic acid, is generally discouraged; topical antiseptics are often used as an alternative for minor infections. More serious or persistent bacterial infections are treated with oral, intravenous, or sometimes intramuscular antibiotics.
It is best to take samples (eg, swabs or blood cultures) to test which organism is responsible for an infection before commencing antibiotics. If the infection is serious (eg, suspected meningococcal disease), do not delay treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic. As culture and sensitivities become available, change to an appropriate narrow-spectrum antibiotic.
Antibiotics should not be prescribed if they are not indicated or unlikely to be of benefit, for example, if the infection is viral in origin. Adverse reactions include cutaneous effects and gastrointestinal side effects. Antibiotic stewardship is also an important consideration.
What is the outcome for bacterial skin infections?
Many bacterial skin infections resolve without treatment or without serious morbidity. However, skin infections can be severe and cause a significant burden of disease worldwide, sometimes resulting in sepsis and death, particularly in vulnerable patient groups such as the elderly, hospitalised, and immunocompromised.
Antibiotic resistance has increasing implications for the treatability and outcome of many bacterial skin infections moving forwards.
Ellis Simonsen SM, van Orman ER, Hatch BE, et al. Cellulitis incidence in a defined population. Epidemiol Infect. 2005;134(2):293–299. doi: 10.1017/S095026880500484X. Journal
Eron LJ, Lipsky BA, Low DE, et al. Managing skin and soft tissue infections: expert panel recommendations on key decision points. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003;52 Suppl 1:i3–17. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkg466. Journal
Kaye KS, Petty LA, Shorr AF, Zilberberg MD. Current Epidemiology, Etiology, and Burden of Acute Skin Infections in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;68(Suppl 3):S193–S199. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciz002. Journal
Ki V, Rotstein C. Bacterial skin and soft tissue infections in adults: A review of their epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and site of care. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2008;19(2):173–184. doi: 10.1155/2008/846453. Journal
Stulberg DL, Penrod MA, Blatny RA. Common bacterial skin infections. Am Fam Physician. 2002;66(1):119–124. Journal
World Health Organisation (WHO). Epidemiology and Management of Common Skin Diseases in Children in Developing Countries. WHO. Published December 1, 2005. Accessed March 20, 2023. Available here
Staphylococcal skin infection
Streptococcal skin infection
Microorganisms found on the skin
Laboratory tests for bacterial infections
PVL-Staph aureus infection
Bacterial Skin Infections: Beneath the Surface — Drs CA Elston and DM Elston, MedScape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Balanitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/balanitis]
Balanitis: Causes, Symptoms, Management, and More — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Balanitis — extra information
Inflammation of the penis
GB06.0Z, GB06.00, EB60.1, 1F23.11
44882003, 52643007, 403463007, 236745001. 198033005
Author(s): Dr Casey Paul Schukow, Michigan University College Medicine, United States. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. June 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Balanitis is an inflammatory condition of the glans penis (head of the penis).
Inflammation often involves the foreskin, or prepuce, which is more appropriately known as balanoposthitis. Many urologic clinic visits are due to balanitis, which may be caused by infection, trauma, irritation to the glans penis, and allergic dermatitis. Untreated balanitis can have a wide range of complications, such as urethral stenosis, phimosis, and malignancy.
Balanitis is present in up to 6% of young men and has an approximate overall prevalence of 3-11%.
Uncircumcised men are at greater risk (approximately 68% increased lifetime incidence) as microorganisms, epithelial debris, and secretions may accumulate between the glans penis and overlying prepuce.
Difficult to distinguish inflammation of the glans penis versus prepuce involvement in uncircumcised men; therefore more frequently diagnosed with balanoposthitis.
Other risk factors include:
Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
Certain drugs e.g. trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
Autoinflammatory conditions e.g. genital lichen planus and psoriasis.
What causes balanitis?
Balanitis can be best categorised as infectious versus non-infectious aetiologies.
Infectious aetiologies include, but are not limited to:
Fungal infection (most common overall cause)
Bacterial infection (second most common overall cause)
Haemolytic streptococci
Staphylococci epidermidis/aureus
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
Varicella zoster virus (VZV)
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
Trichomonas vaginalis
Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis (scabies)
Non-infectious aetiologies include, but are not limited to:
Inflammatory conditions
Circinate balanitis (reactive arthritis)
Genital lichen planus
Lichen sclerosus (balanitis xerotica obliterans, BXO)
Pseudoepitheliomatous, keratotic and micaceous balanitis
Premalignant conditions
Erythroplasia of Queyrat
Malignant conditions
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Poor genital hygiene
Chemotherapy-induced e.g. fluorouracil (5FU)
What are the clinical features of balanitis?
Clinical features of balanitis vary depending on the specific aetiology.
In general, clinical features include, but are not limited to:
Itchiness, bleeding, and erythema of the glans penis.
Specific clinical features can be characterised by the following examples.
Candida balanitis — blotchy erythema with small red “satellite” papules or dry dull red areas.
Anaerobic infection — foul-smelling and malodorous inflammation with or without discharge; may be accompanied by tender inguinal lymph nodes.
Aerobic infection — may see uniform erythema and local oedema.
Trichomonas vaginalis — superficial erosions may lead to phimosis (retraction of penile foreskin in uncircumcised persons).
HSV — grouped vesicles on an erythematous base which may rupture, unveiling painful shallow, grey ulcers.
HPV — multiple flesh-coloured and/or erythematous circinate lesions that become acetowhite after 5% acetic acid is applied.
Circinate balanitis — grey-white annular papules that coalesce to form “geographic” areas surrounded by a white-erythematous margin on the glans penis. Often accompanied by other features of reactive arthritis (such as conjunctivitis and arthritis).
Zoon’s balanitis — symmetric “cayenne pepper spots” and orange-glazed erythema on the glans penis due to microvascular haemorrhage and hemosiderin deposition.
Genital lichen planus — violaceous annular papules and patches over the glans penis and scrotum; sometimes accompanied by linear white “Wickham striae” with hyperpigmented centres.
BXO — otherwise known as penile lichen sclerosus; hyperkeratosis of the squamous mucosa and peri-meatal glans appearing as white confluent papules or ivory-white papular lesions.
Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperkeratotic and micaceous balanitis — thick well circumscribed mica like scaling over the glans
Drug-induced balanitis — clearly demarcated erythema, oedema, and/or blistering of the glans penis; may be violaceous; history of provocative drug use before onset.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Erythema and inflammation may appear more violaceous/dark blue as opposed to red in patients of darker Fitzpatrick skin types.
What are the complications of balanitis?
Pain and ulceration.
Inflammation extension to involve the prepuce (balanoposthitis).
Adhesions between the glans and prepuce.
Phimosis — constriction of the opening of the prepuce that prevents retraction beyond the glans penis.
Due to chronic prepuce inflammation and oedema.
Can result in difficulty urinating and sexual dysfunction.
Forcible retraction can lead to paraphimosis; a urologic emergency.
Paraphimosis — trapping of the foreskin proximal to the glans penis limiting blood flow. Increased size and pain over minutes to hours once trapping has occurred; it is a urologic emergency requiring release of the constriction (by a dorsal slit operation).
Recurrent genital infections (such as yeast) is uncommon in healthy individuals and may warrant screening for immunocompromised conditions (HIV, diabetes, cancer).
How is balanitis diagnosed?
Diagnosed clinically, proper history (including sexual history, autoimmunity) and a physical exam are essential.
Swabs for microbiology (bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and viruses).
Dermoscopy and biopsy to further evaluate balanitis refractory to treatment and/or exclude malignancy.
What is the differential diagnosis for balanitis?
Infectious balanitis (Candida, HSV)
Pre-malignancy (Erythroplasia of Queyrat, Bowenoid papulosis, Bowen’s disease)
Fixed drug eruption.
What is the treatment for balanitis?
Regularly retract the prepuce and gently clean with lukewarm water, and if desired with a light emollient.
Thoroughly dry the entire glans penis and prepuce.
Saline baths, dilute potassium permanganate soaks, or Burow’s solution are helpful in drying the glans in weepy exudative conditions.
Many patients will try over-the-counter antifungal creams and may present with refractory balanitis if the initial cause was not fungal or yeast (Candida).
Topical antifungals (e.g. clotrimazole, miconazole, nystatin)
Non-infectious eczematous cause:
Topical mild-moderate strength steroid cream.
For more severe inflammatory causes of balanitis (such as Zoon’s balanitis, genital lichen planus, BXO):
Stronger topical corticosteroids (clobetasol 0.05%) and/or
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (pimecrolimus 1% ointment).
Psoriatic balanitis:
Topical moderate strength corticosteroids
Topical Vitamin D3 analogues (calcipotriol ointment) and/or
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus ointment).
Drug-induced balanitis:
Topical moderate-high strength corticosteroids are recommended
Discontinuation of the offending drug.
Pre-malignant causes of balanitis (such as erythroplaisa of Queyrat):
Topical 5-fluorouracil 5% and/or
Topical imiquimod 5% creams
How do you prevent balanitis?
Maintaining proper hygiene is essential, especially in children; frequent diaper changes are recommended.
Avoid frequent washing of the penis and prepuce with soaps; use a light emollient and properly dry the area before putting on clothing.
In patients who are uncircumcised, pull back the prepuce to expose the glans fully during urinating and washing (lukewarm) to prevent collection of fluids in between the prepuce and glans.
In those who are sexually active, safe sex practice (e.g. condom use) is important.
What is the outcome for balanitis?
Most individuals with balanitis recover without complications with appropriate treatment and genital hygiene measures. In those who are uncircumcised, it is not uncommon for balanitis to recur.
Phimosis and paraphimosis are emergent complications of balanitis and must be evaluated by a urologist.
Arunkumar S, Murugan B, Sowdhamanai B, Sureshkumar. Balanitis and Balanoposthitis – Review article. Int J Res Health Sci. 2014;2(1):375–92.
Javaid AA, Powell K, Awad K Guideline review NICE Clinical Knowledge Summary: balanitis in children. Archives of Disease in Childhood - Education and Practice. 2022;107:131–2. Guideline
Lam K, Cook DK. Chronic balanitis: When should we be concerned?. Aust J Gen Pract. 2020;49(12):839–41. doi:10.31128/AJGP-03-20-5283. Journal
Nemirovsky DR, Singh R, Jalalian A, Malik RD. Urologic dermatology: a comprehensive foray into the noninfectious etiologies of balanitis. Int J Dermatol. 2021;10.1111/ijd.15985. doi:10.1111/ijd.15985. Journal
Pandya I, Shinojia M, Vadukul D, Marfatia YS. Approach to balanitis/balanoposthitis: Current guidelines. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2014;35(2):155–7. doi:10.4103/0253-7184.142415. Journal
Genital skin problems
Genital lichen planus
Zoon balanitis/ Plasma cell balanitis
The penis and foreskin — Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Behcet Disease]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/behcet-disease]
Behçet disease: Background, Treatment and More
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Behçet disease — extra information
Behcet syndrome, Adamantiades Behcet disease, Malignant aphthosis, Behcet disease
4A62, GA80.0, GA41.0, DA01.10
310701003, 110426005, 1144914004
Authors: Dr Daniel Shaw, Dermatology Registrar and Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, East Lancashire NHS Trust, UK. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2021.
Differential diagnoses
What is Behçet disease?
Behçet disease (BD) is a rare, multi-system condition characterised by recurrent painful oral and genital ulcers, a variety of skin lesions, and eye problems.
Many other organs such as the gut, nervous system, lungs, and arteries may also be affected. It is a form of vasculitis which primarily targets small arteries, but can affect both arteries and veins of all sizes.
It is also known as Adamantiades-Behçet disease, Behçet syndrome, and malignant aphthosis.
Behçet disease - eye Behçet disease - tongue Behçet disease - pustular lesion on arm
Who gets Behçet disease?
Onset is usually between 30 and 40 years of age. It rarely occurs in children. It was previously thought that BD was more common in males compared with females, but more recent data suggests that incidence is similar, although this varies between different ethnic and geographic groups.
What causes Behçet disease?
Behçet disease is of unknown cause, but it is thought to have an autoimmune basis. It is associated with several genetic factors, particularly HLA-B51. Several infections have also been implicated as potential triggers including Streptococcus sanguis, herpes simplex virus, hepatitis viruses, and parvovirus B19.
What are the clinical features of Behçet disease?
Common mucocutaneous features
Oral ulcers — anywhere in the mouth, pharynx, and tonsils.
Typically multiple in number and measure 1–3 cm in size, although they can be larger.
Usually sharp defined margin with a fibrin-coated base, surrounding erythema, and yellow pseudomembrane.
Multiple shallow pinpoint ulcers 1–2 mm in diameter, occurring in clusters (herpetiform ulcers).
Genital ulcers — painful, recurrent ulcers on the vulva, vagina, perineum and inguinal areas, scrotum, and penis.
Genital sores are less common than oral lesions and may heal with scars.
Pathergy is a commonly observed feature in Behçet disease, and refers to the eruption of papulopustules at the site of a needle injury within 24–48 hours. Pathergy is not specific to BD, and can also occur in pyoderma gangrenosum and Sweet syndrome.
Other skin lesions include:
Acne-like papulopustular and nodular lesions
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Superficial thrombophlebitis
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet syndrome).
Other systemic features
Ophthalmic lesions — seen in 70% of patients, and include:
Anterior and/or posterior uveitis
Thrombosis of the retinal artery and vein
Musculoskeletal symptoms include:
A mono- or oligoarthritis of the medium and large joints
Vascular involvement is present in 25% of patients, resulting in:
Superficial thrombophlebitis and deep vein thrombosis
Thrombosis of the vena cava, dural sinus, and Budd-Chiari syndrome
Arterial manifestations resulting in stenosis, thrombosis, and aneurysm formation.
Involvement of the aorta and pulmonary artery can cause life-threatening occlusion or haemorrhage from aneurysm formation.
Other organ systems which can be affected less commonly include neurological, pulmonary, renal, and cardiac.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The features are similar, although Behçet disease is less common in those with skin of colour.
What are the complications of Behçet disease?
Given the multi-system nature of Behçet disease, there are many potential complications.
The most serious complications include:
Vascular complications, particularly when the aorta and pulmonary arteries are affected — this can be life-threatening
CNS involvement leading to permanent neurological deficits
Bowel perforation and peritonitis.
How is Behçet disease diagnosed?
BD can be challenging to diagnose, and several years may elapse before a confident diagnosis can be made, and strict diagnostic criteria fulfilled. It is sometimes useful to classify sufferers as having possible, probable, or definite Behçet disease as new symptoms evolve. There are no definitive confirmatory diagnostic tests.
The International Study Group Criteria are widely used in diagnosis, and criteria include:
At least three episodes of minor aphthous, major aphthous, or herpetiform oral ulceration over a 12-month period (observed by a doctor or patient) plus at least two of the following:
Recurrent genital ulceration — aphthous ulceration or scarring observed by a doctor or patient
Ophthalmic involvement — anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis or cells in vitreous on slit examination or retinal vasculitis observed by an ophthalmologist
Cutaneous lesions — erythema nodosum observed by a doctor or patient, pseudofolliculitis or papulopustular lesions, or acneiform nodules observed by a doctor
Positive pathergy test — observed at 24–48 hours.
Common investigations include:
Urea and electrolytes
Serum iron, folate, zinc and vitamin B12
Culture/PCR from oral or genital ulcers to exclude HSV infection
Other investigations may be required and depend on the organ system affected.
What is the differential diagnosis for Behçet disease?
This depends on the clinical presentation but other common conditions which cause orogenital aphthous ulcers should be considered.
Differentials include:
Herpesvirus infections
Primary and secondary syphilis
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Complex aphthosis (recurrent oral and genital ulcers in the absence of other features)
Inflammatory bowel disease
PFAPA syndrome (periodic fever, aphthosis, pharyngitis, adenitis)
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis
MAGIC syndrome (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage)
Haploinsufficiency of A20 (HA20)
What is the treatment for Behçet disease?
Behçet disease treatment should be tailored to each individual patient based on clinical manifestations and extent of disease — an MDT approach is required. Behçet disease typically has a relapsing-remitting course, and treatments should aim to suppress any inflammatory exacerbations and prevent irreversible organ damage, particularly in the initial phase of disease.
Ocular, vascular, and neurological manifestations are often more serious and require more aggressive treatment.
Treatment of mucosal disease
Topical treatments include:
Corticosteroids applied as creams, gels, or mouth rinses
Pimecrolimus — as an alternative to topical steroids
Antibiotics such as tetracyclines
Antiseptics — chlorhexidine mouthwash
Hydroxypropyl cellulose
Systemic treatments for mucosal disease include:
TNF-alpha inhibitors
Interferon alpha-21 and interferon alpha-2b
Treatment of skin manifestations
With the exception of erythema nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum, most other cutaneous lesions respond well to the above treatments. Recalcitrant acneiform lesions may require oral isotretinoin.
Erythema nodosum in Behçet disease:
Raises the possibility of underlying dermal vasculitis
Colchicine is generally used first-line, but if this fails, systemic glucocorticoids combined with another immunosuppressive agent may be used.
Evidence of ulceration or detection of medium-vessel vasculitis on skin biopsy is an indication for systemic glucocorticoids with another immunosuppressive agent (typically azathioprine).
Pyoderma gangrenosum in BD should be managed as in other causes of this disease.
Treatment of multi-system Behçet disease
The key management points are:
Oral corticosteroids: recommended treatment for patients with moderate to severe disease with ocular, vascular, gastrointestinal, or neurologic involvement.
Azathioprine: as a steroid-sparing agent
TNF-alpha inhibitors, particularly infliximab for refractory ocular BD
Cyclophosphamide — reserved for life-threatening complications of BD mainly when there is major vessel or CNS involvement
Major blood vessel disease, including thrombosis is treated with immunosuppression and not anticoagulation
CNS involvement is typically more refractory to treatment
Other agents that can be used include interleukin-1 receptor antagonists (e.g. anakinra), alemtuzumab, tocilizumab, rituximab, and stem cell transplantation.
What is the outcome for Behçet disease?
Behçet disease typically runs a relapsing-remitting course and the prognosis varies depending on the organ systems affected.
Mortality is low but is increased in patients with neurological, vascular, and gastrointestinal involvement. Ophthalmic involvement is a major cause of morbidity.
The prognosis is worse in males.
See Behçet disease pictures
Aeschlimann FA, Batu ED, Canna SW, et al. A20 haploinsufficiency (HA20): clinical phenotypes and disease course of patients with a newly recognised NF-kB-mediated autoinflammatory disease. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018;77(5):728-735. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212403 Journal
Davatchi F, Chams-Davatchi C, Shams H, et al. Behçet's disease: epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2017;13(1):57–65. doi:10.1080/1744666X.2016. 1205486. Journal
Nair JR, Moots RJ. Behçet's disease. Clin Med (Lond). 2017;17(1):71–7. Journal
Nakamura K, Tsunemi Y, Kaneko F, Alpsoy E. Mucocutaneous manifestations of Behçet's disease. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021;7:613432. Published 2021 Feb 1. doi:10.3389/fmed.2020.613432. Journal
Scherrer MAR, Rocha VB, Garcia LC. Behçet's disease: review with emphasis on dermatological aspects. An Bras Dermatol. 2017;92(4):452–64. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20177359. Journal
Tong B, Liu X, Xiao J, Su G. Immunopathogenesis of Behçet's disease. Front Immunol. 2019;10:665. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00665. Journal
Cutaneous manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease
Behçet's syndrome — NORD
Behçet's syndrome — Vasculitis UK
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Benign Skin Lesions]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/benign-skin-lesions]
Common benign skin lesions
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Common benign skin lesions
Common benign skin lesions — extra information
D17, D18.1,D22, D23, L82, L91.8
2F23.0, 2F20.Z, 2F21.0, EJ20.1, 2E80.0Z, 2E80.00, 2F25, EK71.0
734932003, 276728004, 397195004, 72100002, 201091002, 255187008, 427186000, 394726009, 247474003, 399956005
Common benign skin lesions
Author: Wafaa Binti Mowlabaccus, Medical Student, Department of Medicine, University of Mauritius, Reduit, Moka, Mauritius. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2020.
Common melanocytic lesions
Common keratinocytic lesions
Common lesions of vascular origin
Common fibrous lesions
Common subcutaneous lesions
What is a benign skin lesion?
A benign skin lesion is a non-cancerous skin growth.
Who gets benign skin lesions?
Any individual from any age group can present with a benign skin lesion.
What are the features of benign skin lesions?
The features in common for benign skin lesions include:
Symmetry in shape, colour and structure
Stable or slowly evolving
Absence of spontaneous bleeding (bleeding or ulceration may be due to recent injury).
Benign lesions can be classified by their cellular origin: melanocytic, keratinocytic, vascular, fibrous, fat, and so on,
Which are the common melanocytic lesions?
Common benign skin lesions of melanocytic origin include the ephilis, lentigo simplex, and melanocytic naevus (mole).
Ephilides are genetically determined well-defined small brown macules with the following characteristics:
Located in areas exposed to the sun such as the face and forearms.
Increased melanin deposition in the basal keratinocyte on biopsy [1,2].
Lentigo simplex is not sun-induced. It has the following characteristics:
Well-circumscribed, uniform brown to black macule
Located on mucous membrane or skin, including palms and soles
Develops during childhood or young adult life [1,2].
A melanocytic naevus can be histologically classified as a junctional, compound, or dermal naevus depending on the location of nests of naevus cells.
A junctional naevus has naevus cells at the base of the epidermis.
A junctional naevus is well-circumscribed pigmented macule with regular but fading borders.
The number and appearance of junctional naevi depend on sun exposure, fluctuating hormonal levels, and immunosuppression [1,3].
Flat melanocytic lesions
Ephilides Lentigo simplex Junctional naevus
A compound naevus has papular and flat components due to junctional and dermal naevus cells.
The compound naevus is usually a pink or brown, dome-shaped papule surrounded by macular pigmentation [3].
Most lesions arise during childhood.
A dermal naevus is characterised by naevus cells in the dermis.
The dermal naevus is an elevated papule.
It can be brown, blue, black or skin coloured.
Dermal naevi arise in childhood but mature during early adult life.
Compound naevus Dermal naevus Papillomatous dermal naevus
Which are the common keratinocytic lesions?
Benign keratoses include solar lentigo and seborrhoeic keratosis.
A solar lentigo is a sun-induced pigmented macule.
Solar lentigines vary from small to large size and are usually tan to brown-black.
The lesions are mostly uniformly pigmented with a sharp border.
They arise in adult life and are prevalent in older people [1,2].
Solar lentigo Solar lentigo Solar lentigo
Seborrhoeic keratosis presents as a variable warty plaque.
Seborrhoeic keratosis has a dull, verrucous, or waxy surface with a classical stuck-on appearance.
The shape and structure are often irregular and varies over time.
They can be yellow to brown to black in colour or made up of several colours.
Skin biopsy reveals a papillomatous epidermis with a thick basal layer and presence of keratin-filled cysts [1,4].
Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis
Stucco keratoses are flat-topped keratotic papules.
Usually rough, dry, and occasionally itchy.
'Stuck on’ appearance on the skin (like sprayed chalk or stucco cement)
Round, oval, or irregular borders; diameter of 1–4mm.
White/cream or grey colour, or sometimes pink or brown
Epidermoid cyst is a follicular nodule with a central punctum.
This type of cyst can be skin-coloured to off-white and is a dome-shaped papule or nodule.
Cheesy or yellowish keratin can be expressed through the punctum or removed by incising the cyst.
The epidermal cyst is lined with flat epidermal cells and has a granular layer surrounding laminated keratin [1,2].
Epidermoid cyst Epidermoid cyst Palpating an epidermoid cyst
Corns and calluses are localised areas of thickened skin induced by pressure
A corn (small tender papule) or callus (thickened non-tender plaque) is most often located on a pressure area of the hand or foot.
A soft corn is a scaly plaque while hard corn is a firm papule with a translucent central core [1,2].
Corn (clavus) Corn (clavus) Calluses
Sebaceous hyperplasia occurs on the forehead and cheeks of adults.
It presents as one or more dome-shaped papules with central umbilication.
Uniform yellow lobules are seen on dermoscopy [1,2].
Sebaceous hyperplasia Sebaceous hyperplasia Sebaceous hyperplasia
Which are the common lesions of vascular origin?
An angioma is due to the proliferation of the endothelial cells.
A superficial angioma is a bright red colour and a deeper angioma is purple or blue.
Angiomas are commonly nodular or macular lesions of varying sizes.
Cherry angioma Cherry angioma Cherry angioma
A pyogenic granuloma is a vascular response to trauma and bacterial infection.
It presents as a rapidly growing friable nodule on fingers, toes, or facial sites.
They have a yellow to violaceous colour.
The pyogenic granuloma is surrounded by a scaly collarette.
Pyogenic granuloma Pyogenic granuloma Pyogenic granuloma
Which are the common fibrous lesions?
Dermatofibroma is a reactive lesion that presents as one or more firm dermal papules.
The dermatofibroma is pink, tan or brown.
It forms a dimple when pinched.
A skin biopsy shows fibrohistiocytic cell proliferation with entrapment of collagen at the periphery [1,2].
Which are the common subcutaneous lesions?
The lipoma is the most common benign soft-tissue tumour.
A lipoma presents as a soft, rubbery, freely mobile mass that is usually found on the back, neck, or trunk.
Skin biopsy shows white adipose tissue in the subcutaneous layer [1,2].
Lipoma Lipoma Painful lipomas
The most common type of skin tag is also called acrochordon.
An acrochordon is a soft, fleshy papule that is almost always pedunculated.
They vary in diameter from 1 to 6 mm.
On biopsy, there is a fibrovascular core covered by normal squamous epithelium [2].
Skin tags Skin tag Skin tag
Higgins JC, Maher MH, Douglas MS. Diagnosing Common Benign Skin Tumors. Am Fam Physician 2015; 92: 601–7. PubMed
Khandpur S, Ramam M. Skin tumours. J Cutan Aesthet Surg 2012; 5: 159–62. DOI: 10.4103/0974-2077.101368. PubMed Central
Wollina U. Seborrheic Keratoses – The most common benign skin tumor of humans. Clinical presentation and an update on pathogenesis and treatment options. Open Access Maced J Med Sci 2018; 6: 2270–5. DOI: 10.3889/oamjms.2018.460. PubMed Central
Common Benign Skin Tumors. Am Fam Physician 2003; 67: 729–38. PubMed
Skin lesions, tumours and cancers
Melanocytic naevus (moles)
Brown spots and freckles
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Sebaceous hyperplasia
Overview of benign lesions of the skin — UpToDate
Benign skin lesions — Medscape
Benign skin lesions — Amboss
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Blistering Skin Conditions]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/blistering-skin-conditions]
Blistering skin conditions
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Blistering skin conditions
Blistering skin conditions — extra information
Blistering skin conditions
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated September 2015.
Acute blistering diseases
Chronic blistering diseases
What is a blistering disease?
A blistering disease is a condition in which there are fluid-filled skin lesions.
Vesicles are small blisters less than 5 mm in diameter.
A bulla is a larger blister. Note that the plural of bulla is bullae.
Blisters may break or the roof of the blister may become detached forming an erosion. Exudation of serous fluid forms crust.
Vesicles A bulla Crust
Acute blistering diseases
Acute blistering diseases can be generalised or localised to one body site and are due to infection or inflammatory disorders. Although most commonly eczematous, generalised acute blistering diseases can be life-threatening and often necessitate hospitalisation.
Acute blistering conditions should be investigated by taking swabs for bacterial and viral culture. A skin biopsy may be helpful in making a diagnosis.
Acute generalised blistering diseases
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis
Neck, limbs, upper trunk
Pseudovesicular plaques, blisters, pustules, purpura, or ulceration
Disease associations: rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune arthritis, myeloid dysplasia
Atypical enterovirus infection
Widespread vesicular eruption
Clears in a few days
When affecting areas of atopic dermatitis, enteroviral infection is called eczema coxsackium.
Chickenpox/varicella
Childhood illness; more serious in adults
Scalp, face, oral mucosa, trunk
Culture/PCR Herpes varicella zoster virus
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis Atypical enterovirus infection Chickenpox/varicella
Traditionally linked to barbiturate use; other drugs have been implicated.
Develop 48 - 72 hours after coma onset.
Self-limiting, usually resolving within 1 to 2 weeks.
History of atopic dermatitis
Monomorphic cluster of umbilicated vesicles
Culture/PCR Herpes simplex virus
Discoid eczema Eczema herpeticum Atopic dermatitis
Polymorphic light eruption
Affects body sites exposed to the sun (hands, upper chest, feet
Papules, plaques, sometimes targetoid
Arises within hours of exposure to bright sunlight
A reaction eg, to infection
An acute eruption of papules, plaques, target lesions
Acral distribution: cheeks, elbows, knees, hands, feet
May have mucositis (lips, conjunctiva, genitalia)
Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
Nearly always drug-induced
Rarely due to mycoplasma infection
Painful red skin may come off in sheets or have multiple coalescing blisters
Polymorphic light eruption Erythema multiforme Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome
Drug started up to 8 weeks prior to the onset
Morbilliform eruption that may blister (without necrolysis)
Often mucosal involvement
Multiorgan damage (renal, hepatic, respiratory, haematological)
Often, marked eosinophilia
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Red skin comes off in sheets
Evidence of staphylococcal infection
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Acute localised blistering diseases
Vesicular hand dermatitis
Rapidly enlarging plaque
Swab Staphylococcus aureus
Wound infections, scabies, etc
Fingers, toes, acral sites
Purplish itchy/burning plaques
Plant dermatitis Bullous impetigo Chilblains
Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis
Hand, foot and mouth disease
Clears in a few days
Acute febrile illness
Swab Streptococcus pyogenes
Recurring rash, typically at the same site
Due to an intermittent drug that has been taken within 24 hours of the rash appearing
Single or few lesions
Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis Erysipelas Fixed drug eruption
Monomorphic, umbilicated
Culture/PCR Herpes simplex virus
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Dermatomal distribution
Culture/PCR Herpes varicella zoster virus
Insect bites and stings
Crops of urticated papules
Central vesicle or punctum
Favour exposed sites
Herpes simplex Herpes zoster Insect bites and stings
Vesicles are very superficial
Necrotising fasciitis
Very sick; septic shock
Rapid spread of cellulitis with purpura/blistering
Anaesthetic areas in early lesions
Bacterial culture essential
Transient acantholytic dermatosis
Itchy or asymptomatic
Extremely rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis
Form of generalised peeling skin syndrome
May be accompanied by blistering
History of injury or neuropathy
Friction, thermal burns, ultraviolet radiation sunburns, chemical burns, fracture
Miliaria Transient acantholytic dermatosis Trauma-ultraviolet radiation
Chronic blistering diseases
Diagnosis of chronic blistering diseases often requires skin biopsy for histopathology and direct immunofluorescence. A blood test for specific antibodies (indirect immunofluorescence) may also prove helpful in making the diagnosis of an immunobullous disease.
Epidermolysis bullosa
Various types including acquired and genetic forms
Onset at birth or early childhood
Also called endemic pemphigus foliaceus
Onset at childhood or adolescence
Often onset in childhood
Benign familial pemphigus
Also called Hailey-Hailey disease
Confined to flexures
Epidermolysis bullosa Mastocytoma Benign familial pemphigus
Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
Patient has systemic lupus erythematosus
Mainly cutaneous (rarely mucosal)
Mostly affects the elderly (rarely infants, children)
Eczematous or urticarial precursor lesions
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Associated gluten-sensitive enteropathy
Intensely itchy; vesicles often removed by scratching leaving erosions
Symmetrical on scalp, shoulders, elbows, knees, buttocks
Bullous pemphigoid Dermatitis herpetiformis
Other immunobullous diseases
Cicatricial pemphigoid
Pemphigoid gestationis
Linear IgA dermatosis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Drug-induced pemphigus
Ocular involvement in autoimmune blistering diseases
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Metabolic photosensitivity
Skin fragility, bullae, milia
Backs of hands, face
Pemphigoid gestationis Pemphigus vulgaris Porphyria cutanea tarda
Blisters and pustules in neonates
Autoimmune diseases in dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Blue Naevus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/blue-naevus]
Blue naevus (blue nevus)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Blue naevus — extra information
Jadassohn blue naevus, blue nevus
254806009, 63166000, 88006009, 67159000, 254807000, 402552003, 11099005
Last Reviewed: February, 2025
Author: Dr Selene Ting, Dermatology Advanced Trainee, Monash Medical Centre, Australia (2025).
Previous contributors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (1997); Dr Anita Eshraghi, Dermatologist, Sweden, (2018)
Peer reviewed and updated by: Dr James A. Ida, MD, MS, Dermatologist, USA (2025)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Differential diagnoses
What is a blue naevus?
A blue naevus (nevus in American spelling) is a type of melanocytic naevus in which spindle-shaped or, less commonly, ovoid naevus cells are located most often wholly but at least partially within the dermis.
Different subtypes of blue naevi include:
Cellular blue naevus
Amelanotic blue naevus
Combined blue naevus
Sclerosing (desmoplastic) blue naevus
Epithelioid blue naevus
Subungual blue naevus.
A blue naevus - the monochrome slate blue colour is typical Blue naevi on the arm and nose A blue naevus on the hand (BlueN-patient16)
Who gets blue naevi?
Blue naevi are twice as common in women compared to men. They are more common among Asians, with a prevalence between 3–5% compared to approximately 1–2% among Caucasian adults. They are rarely found at birth or within the first two years of life.
What causes blue naevi?
Blue naevi derive from the incomplete migration of melanocytes from the neural crest to the skin during foetal development. The melanocytes of blue naevi are located deeper in the skin within the dermis as compared to those of brown naevi, which are located in the more superficial epidermis.
It has been held that the deeper location of dermal melanocytes in blue naevi causes their colour to be perceived by the eye as bluish. This phenomenon has classically been extrapolated to be due to the Tyndall effect, which posits that shorter (blue) wavelengths of incident light are preferentially scattered by the deeper-located dermal melanocytes; this is in contrast to the more superficially located epidermal melanocytes which appear brown.
A more recent study, however, has suggested that the perception of blue colour in blue naevi may be more aptly regarded as a relative decrease in scatter of higher wavelength red light rather than as an increase in scatter of lower wavelength blue light. Thus, these authors conclude that blue naevi are perceived as blue because they scatter less red light, leading to a shift in hue toward blue (“subtractive colour mixing”), rather than because they scatter more blue light.
What are the clinical features of blue naevi?
The common blue naevus is a small solitary, bluish, smooth surfaced macule, papule or plaque. They are generally round or oval in shape.
The common blue naevus usually measures 0.5–1 cm in diameter. The cellular blue naevus is more nodular and usually measures at least 1 cm in diameter.
The colour of blue naevi can vary but is usually made up of blue to grey hues; rarely, the colour may be brown or yellowish.
Blue naevi are usually found on the distal extremities (dorsum of hands or feet), buttocks, scalp, and face, although they can occur anywhere on the body.
Subungual blue naevi present as blue macules within the lunula or under the nail plate; they originate below the nail matrix and do not cause longitudinal melanonychia.
Blue naevi have rarely been reported to involve the vagina, spermatic cord, lymph nodes, uterine cervix, prostate, and oral mucosa.
What are the complications of blue naevi?
Common blue naevi do not have any complications. They are benign and remain unchanged throughout life.In contrast, cellular blue naevi can rarely transform into malignant cellular blue naevi (a type of melanoma).
How are blue naevi diagnosed?
Blue naevi are usually diagnosed clinically by their typical appearance. The diagnosis may be confirmed by finding a homogeneous, steel-blue, hazy or ground-glass pattern on dermoscopy.
Dermoscopy of a blue naevus (BlueN-patient3)Dermoscopy of a blue naevus (BlueN-patient7)
Histopathology of dermal dendritic melanocytes that make up a common blue naevus Histopathology of a cellular blue naevus - cells may be round oval or fusiform
Dermatoscopic views of blue naevi
Blue naevus Blue naevus
What is the differential diagnosis for blue naevi?
The differential diagnosis of blue naevi includes:
Traumatic tattoo reaction
Combined naevus (a blue naevus combined with a compound melanocytic naevus)
A vascular lesion such as venous lake
Cutaneous metastasis
Nevus of Ota or Ito.
What are eruptive blue naevi?
Eruptive blue naevi present as a sudden, rapid appearance of clustered, blue-grey naevi at various anatomical sites in immunosuppressed patients or in those with a blistering disorder or cutaneous injury. They have been reported at sites of herpes zoster and have been associated with puberty, pregnancy, and severe sunburns.
Eruptive blue naevi can occur in individuals of any Fitzpatrick skin type, with no reported racial predilection.
What is the treatment for blue naevi?
Usually, no treatment is required.
Blue naevi that are larger than 1 cm, change or appear de novo in an adult should be considered for histological evaluation to exclude melanoma. Blue naevi of the scalp are often removed as a precaution because their history is frequently unknown and they are difficult to monitor. They may also be surgically removed for cosmetic reasons.
What is the outcome for blue naevus?
Unless surgically removed, blue naevi typically persist lifelong.
Shive M, Ho D, Lai O, Mamalis A, Miller KM, Jagdeo J. The Role of Subtractive Color Mixing in the Perception of Blue Nevi and Veins—Beyond the Tyndall Effect. JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152(10):1167–1169. Journal
Murali R, McCarthy SW, Scolyer RA. Blue nevi and related lesions: a review highlighting atypical and newly described variants, distinguishing features and diagnostic pitfalls. Adv Anat Pathol. 2009;16:365–82. PubMed
McCalmont TH. Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP. Dermatology. 2. USA: Elsevier; 2008. Benign melanocytic neoplasma; pp. 1722–3. PubMed
Barnhill RL, Argenyi Z, Berwick M, et al. Atypical cellular blue nevi (cellular blue nevi with atypical features): lack of consensus for diagnosis and distinction from cellular blue nevi and malignant melanoma ("malignant blue nevus"). Am J Surg Pathol. 2008;32:36–44. PubMed
Bogart MM, Bivens  MM, Patterson  JW, Russell MA. Blue nevi: a case report and review of the literature. Cutis. 2007;80(1):42–44. PubMed
Phadke  PA, Zembowicz A.  Blue nevi and related tumors. Clin Lab Med. 2011;31(2):345–58. PubMed
Zembowicz A, Phadke PA.  Blue nevi and variants: an update. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011;135(3):327–36. PubMed
Borgenvik TL, Karlsvik TM, Ray S, Fawzy M, James N. Blue nevus-like and blue nevus-associated melanoma: a comprehensive review of the literature. ANZ J Surg. 2017 May;87(5):345–9. doi: 10.1111/ans.13946. Epub 2017 Mar 20. Review. PubMed
Skroza N, Proietti I, Tolino E, et al. Eruptive blue nevi of the scalp in a patient with Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser syndrome during isotretinoin therapy. Indian J Dermatol 2019; 64: 339. PubMed
Blue naevus pathology
Combined cellular blue naevus and trichoepithelioma pathology
Melanocytic naevus (moles)
Blue Nevi — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Boil]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/boil]
Boils (furunculosis)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Boil — extra information
Infections, Follicular disorder
416675009, 416893007, 399008001, 3092008
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated by Dr Amanda Oakley; Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer; June 2014. Latest update by Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University, London, United Kingdom, January 2016.
A boil (also called a furuncle) is a deep form of bacterial folliculitis (infection of a hair follicle).
What are the clinical features of a boil?
Boils present as one or more tender red spots, lumps or pustules. Careful inspection reveals that the boil is centred on a hair follicle. A boil is a deep form of bacterial folliculitis; superficial folliculitis is sometimes present at the same time. Staphylococcus aureus can be cultured from the skin lesions.
If there are multiple heads, the lesion is called a carbuncle. Large boils form abscesses, defined as an accumulation of pus within a cavity. Cellulitis may also occur, ie, infection of the surrounding tissues, and this may cause fever and illness.
Boil Boil in axilla Surrounding cellulitis Carbuncle
Most people with boils are otherwise healthy and have good personal hygiene. They do however carry Staphylococcus aureus on the surface of their skin (staphylococcal carrier state). Why this occurs is usually not known, but it is estimated that 10–20% of the population are staphylococcal carriers.
Staphylococcus aureus is most commonly carried in the nostrils, armpits, between the legs and in the cleft between the buttocks. It may be transferred to other sites from the nostrils via the finger nails.
Although most people with boils are otherwise healthy, boils are sometimes related to immune deficiency, anaemia, diabetes, smoking or iron deficiency.
What is the treatment for a boil?
Medical treatment of boils
Treatment of boils depends on their severity. Your doctor may give you specific advice and medical treatment, some are listed below:
Antiseptic or antibacterial soap in your daily bath or shower for a week then twice weekly for several weeks. The cleanser may cause a little dryness.
Use a hand sanitiser regularly to reduce the chance of reinfecting yourself or others with contaminated hands.
Antiseptic or antibiotic ointment or gel to apply to the inside of the nostrils.
Wipe the entire skin surface daily for a week with 70% isopropyl alcohol in water (this will make the skin dry).
Apply a topical antiseptic such as povidone iodine or chlorhexidine cream to the boils and cover with a square of gauze.
Your doctor may prescribe an oral antibiotic (usually the penicillin antibiotic flucloxacillin), sometimes for several weeks.
Other members of the family with boils should also follow a skin cleansing regime. Your doctor may also advise the family to apply topical antibiotic to their nostrils in case they are Staphylococcus aureus carriers as well.
If the boils fail to clear up, a swab should be taken for microbiological culture, in case of methicillin (meticillin) resistant staphylococci.
Sometimes, special antibiotics may be prescribed on the recommendation of a specialist, including fusidic acid, clindamycin, rifampicin and cephalosporins.
General measures to prevent boils
If you are overweight, try to reduce your weight; take regular exercise.
Follow a balanced healthy diet with meat, plenty of fruit and vegetables.
Wash your whole body once a day with soap or cleanser and water. Wash your hands several times daily or use antiseptic hand rubs.
Don't share your flannel or towel with other family members.
Maintain a clean handkerchief and don't pick your nose!
Change your underclothes and night attire regularly.
Consider modifying leisure activities that cause sweating and friction from clothing, such as squash and jogging.
If you are iron deficient, a course of iron tablets may help reduce infection.
1000 mg of vitamin C each day has also been advocated to improve deficient neutrophil function.
Shallcross LJ, Hayward AC, Johnson AM, Petersen I. Incidence and recurrence of boils and abscesses within the first year: a cohort study in UK primary care. Br J Gen Pract. 2015 Oct;65(639):e668–76. doi: 10.3399/bjgp15X686929. PubMed PMID: 26412844; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4582880.
Bacterial folliculitis
Staphylococcal infections
Impetigo — emedicinehealth
Bacterial infections
Bacterial infections online course for health professionals
Boils — Kidshealth.org.nz
Boils — emedicinehealth
Folliculitis — Medscape Reference
Boils — British Association of Dermatologists
Patient information: Boil (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Management of Bacterial Infections of the Hair Follicles — International Foundation of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Bromhidrosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/bromhidrosis]
Bromhidrosis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Bromhidrosis — extra information
Malodorous body odour, Bromidrosis, Osmidrosis, Ozochrotia, Malodorous sweating
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2005; Updated: Dr Maanasa Bandla, Hospital Intern, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist, Christchurch, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. June 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is bromhidrosis?
Bromhidrosis, also known as osmidrosis or ozochrotia, is an unpleasant or offensive body odour due to any cause including poor hygiene, infections, diet or medications, or inherited metabolic disorders. It may be associated with hyperhidrosis.
Who gets bromhidrosis?
Bromhidrosis can affect all age groups, races, and both sexes. Bromhidrosis is more common in adults than children as sebaceous glands and apocrine sweat glands do not become active until puberty. The elderly have a different body odour from babies, pre-pubescent children, teenagers, and adults. It has a male predominance, and can be a particular issue in hot humid tropical climates. There may be a genetic predisposition, with studies suggesting axillary malodour is more common in Europeans and Africans than Asians.
What causes bromhidrosis?
Body odour is normal and is primarily produced by the breakdown of sweat, sebum, and keratin by bacteria on the skin surface (skin microbiota). What is regarded as acceptable is determined by cultural influences including race and social upbringing.
Bromhidrosis may be classified as eccrine or apocrine, exogenous or endogenous:
Eccrine bromhidrosis
Eccrine glands are distributed over most of the skin surface.
Eccrine sweat is secreted continuously and is normally odourless.
Eccrine sweat is important in thermoregulation.
Apocrine bromhidrosis
Apocrine glands are located in the axillae, anogenital region, and breasts, and become active in puberty.
Apocrine sweat is secreted intermittently and is normally odourless.
Apocrine sweat is controlled by the sympathetic nervous system.
Skin microbiota — Corynebacterium species, Staphylococcus hominis, S epidermidis, Cutibacterium avidum, Acinetobacter schindleri.
Skin infections — erythrasma, pitted keratolysis, trichomycosis, Sphingomonas paucimobilis.
Foods — garlic, onion, asparagus, curry, alcohol.
Medications and toxins — penicillin, bromides, dupilumab.
Systemic and skin disorders — obesity, diabetes mellitus, liver disease, renal failure, skin disorders of palms/soles and flexures.
Metabolic disorders — trimethylaminuria, phenylketonuria, hypermethioninaemia.
What are the clinical features of bromhidrosis?
Bromhidrosis presents as a bad body smell which the patient may be unaware of. Malodour may be the reason for the consultation, raised by a mother or partner, or be obvious during a medical consultation for other reasons. The odour may be worse after exercise, often adhering to clothing.
Apocrine bromhidrosis is the most common form of bromhidrosis in adults and is localised, usually to the armpits and/or anogenital area.
Eccrine bromhidrosis presents as a generalised malodour, and may be associated with bad breath (halitosis), anogenital odour, and smelly urine.
Specific sites and features to look for on examination:
Skin folds — intertrigo, erythrasma, flexural dermatoses
Body hair (particularly axillary) — trichomycosis
Hands and feet — pitted keratolysis, palmoplantar keratoderma
Inside the nose for foreign body.
Underarm sweating Trichomycosis axillaris Macerated skin over the toes and ball of the foot in pitted keratolysis
What are the complications of bromhidrosis?
Bromhidrosis can have a significant impact on quality of life, causing:
How is bromhidrosis diagnosed?
Bromhidrosis is a clinical diagnosis, but careful history and examination is required to determine the underlying cause. Investigations should be considered in children, if the smell is generalised also involving urine and breath, or if it is of recent onset unrelated to hygiene habits.
The clinician who notices a strong body odour is wise to tread carefully when broaching the subject but correct diagnosis and treatment has the potential to be life-changing for the patient.
What is the differential diagnosis for bromhidrosis?
Body dysmorphophobia
Olfactory hallucinations (due to neurological or psychiatric disorders)
Olfactory refractory syndrome (fear of having an offensive body odour)
What is the treatment for bromhidrosis?
Good hygiene with regular washing using soaps and cleansers, deodorant, antiperspirant, removal of sweaty clothing
Hair removal by shaving, electrolysis, or lasers
Exfoliation of areas of keratin degradation
Avoidance of odour-causing foods and medications
Treatment of skin infections
Treatment of hyperhidrosis
Removal of nasal foreign body
Removal of apocrine glands — laser, surgery, liposuction curettage, microwave-induced fibrosis
Dietary modification for metabolic disorders
What is the outcome for bromhidrosis?
Lam TH, Verzotto D, Brahma P, et al. Understanding the microbial basis of body odor in pre-pubescent children and teenagers. Microbiome. 2018;6(1):213. doi:10.1186/s40168-018-0588-z. Journal
Lanzalaco A, Vanoosthuyze K, Stark C, Swaile D, Rocchetta H, Spruell R. A comparative clinical study of different hair removal procedures and their impact on axillary odor reduction in men. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;15(1):58–65. doi:10.1111/jocd.12197. Journal
Lucky AW. Acquired bromhidrosis in an 8-year-old boy secondary to a nasal foreign body. Arch Dermatol. 1991;127(1):129. doi:10.1001/archderm.1991.01680010141033. PubMed
Malik AS, Porter CL, Feldman SR. Bromhidrosis treatment modalities: a literature review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;S0190-9622(21)00175-4. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.030. PubMed
Mogilnicka I, Bogucki P, Ufnal M. Microbiota and malodor - etiology and management. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21(8):2886. doi:10.3390/ijms21082886. Journal
Patel F, Tu YM, Fernandes S, Chapas A. A case of axillary bromhidrosis secondary to trimethylaminuria successfully treated with microwave-based therapy. JAAD Case Rep. 2019;5(10):915–17. doi:10.1016/j.jdcr.2019.07.018. PubMed Central
Salim G, Zahra MF. Trichobacteriosis: contribution of dermoscopy. Dermatol Online J. 2014;20(9):13030/qt7488g7vb. PubMed
Scarff CE. Sweaty, smelly hands and feet. Aust Fam Physician. 2009;38(9):666–9. PubMed
Semkova K, Gergovska M, Kazandjieva J, Tsankov N. Hyperhidrosis, bromhidrosis, and chromhidrosis: fold (intertriginous) dermatoses. Clin Dermatol. 2015;33(4):483–91. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2015.04.013. PubMed
Vaginal or genital malodour in women
Bromhidrosis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Capillaritis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/capillaritis]
Capillaritis (pigmented purpura)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Capillaritis — extra information
Pigmented purpura, Pigmented purpuric eruptions
Blood vessel problems
85461008, 20343006, 238783008, 64146000, 238782003, 56231002, 41486008, 238781005
Blood vessel problems
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999. Updated January 2016.
What is capillaritis?
Capillaritis is a harmless skin condition in which there are reddish-brown patches caused by leaky capillaries. It is also known as pigmented purpura.
Schamberg purpura Close-up of lower back Capillaritis
Who gets capillaritis?
Capillaritis can affect anyone, but is uncommon in children.
It usually affects otherwise healthy people.
Occasionally capillaritis arises as a reaction to a medication; many different drugs have been occasionally associated with capillaritis including meprobamate, carbamazepine and carbromal.
In others a food additive or a viral infection may be responsible.
Capillaritis may also develop after exercise.
What causes capillaritis?
The capillaries are small blood vessels near the skin surface. For unknown reasons they sometimes become inflamed, although a true vasculitis is not seen on skin biopsy. Blood cells may pass through small gaps that arise between the cells, which make up the capillary walls. The result is petechial haemorrhages. These fade away depositing haemosiderin in the upper parts of the dermis.
What are the clinical features of capillaritis?
Capillaritis is classified according to its appearance. It is characterised by tiny red and brown dots, described as cayenne pepper spots. These may be scattered over a body region or group together to form a flat red patch, which becomes brown and then slowly fades away over weeks to months. The clinical descriptions are named after the dermatologist who first described them
Schamberg disease (progressive pigmented purpura)
Schamberg disease is the most common type of capillaritis. Regular or irregular crops of red-brown flat patches with cayenne pepper spots on their borders appear for no apparent reason. Although most common on the lower legs, the Schamberg form of capillaritis can arise on any part of the body. It is usually irregularly distributed on both sides with few or many patches. There are no symptoms.
Doucas-Kapetanakis eczematid-like purpura (itching purpura)
Doucas-Kapetanakis eczematid-like purpura appears similar to Schamberg disease, but itches. Reddish-purple macules appear around the ankles and may spread up the legs. Itching purpura can also affect trunk and upper limbs. Itching leads to scratching and lichenification.
Gougerot-Blum purpura (pigmented purpuric lichenoid dermatosis)
Gougerot-Blum capillaritis is less common. The patches are thickened and itchy, rather like eczema, but pathology is of a lichenoid reaction.
Majocchi purpura (purpura annularis telangiectodes)
In this condition there are dilated capillaries as well as brown patches and cayenne spots. Annular patches gradually spread outwards and form concentric rings.
Purpura annularis telangiectodes of Majocchi
Lichen aureus is a solitary brown-yellow patch that is very persistent. It often overlies a varicose vein.
Exercise-induced capillaritis
Capillaritis may develop on the ankles following prolonged or vigorous exercise (eg, after 18 holes of golf, tramping, or dancing), especially during warm weather. The spots fade to brown within a few days and eventually disappear. A burning sensation may occur as the new lesions appear. Exercise-induced capillaritis can occur on a single occasion or recur regularly after exercise.
Golfer's capillaritis
How is capillaritis diagnosed?
What is the treatment for capillaritis?
As capillaritis is a mild condition, most patients do not require treatment. There is no known cure.
Consider if a medication could be the cause: discontinue it for several months to find out if the capillaritis improves.
Try avoiding food preservatives and artificial colouring agents. Return to a normal diet if there is no improvement after several months.
Topical steroids can be helpful for itching.
Phototherapy can be effective at clearing capillaritis but do not prevent it recurring.
If the lower leg is affected, consider wearing graduated compression elastic hose. This is helpful to reduce exercise-induced capillaritis.
Currently available vascular lasers are not particularly helpful for capillaritis.
What is the outcome for capillaritis?
Capillaritis can disappear within a few weeks, recur from time to time, or persist for years.
Vascular skin problems
Cutaneous vasculitis
Small vessel vasculitis
Exercise-induced vasculitis
Lichen aureus pathology
Pigmented Purpuric Dermatitis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Catscratch Disease]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/catscratch-disease]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cat scratch disease — extra information
Catscratch fever, Benign inoculation lymphoreticulosis, Cat scratch disease, CSD, Benign lymphoreticulosis, Subacute regional lymphadenitis
Last Reviewed: January, 2024
Author(s): Dr Sarah Seol, Waikato Hospital, New Zealand (2024)
Previous contributors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer (2003)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Demographics and risk factors
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnosis
What is cat scratch disease?
Cat scratch disease (CSD) is a bacterial infection that affects the lymph nodes. It is also known as cat scratch fever or subacute regional lymphadenitis.
Who gets cat scratch disease?
Risk factors for acquiring cat scratch disease (CSD) include:
Owning a cat younger than 12 months
Getting licked, bitten, or scratched by an infected kitten
Petting an infected cat
Owning at least one kitten or cat with fleas
Being immunocompromised
Working with kittens and cats eg, veterinarians and veterinary nurses.
CSD can occur in people of all ages but is most common in children and adolescents. The majority (80%) of patients with cat scratch disease are less than 21 years old.
A primary lesion of cat scratch disease on the cheek - note the infra-auricular lymphadenopathy (CSD-patient2)
What causes cat scratch disease?
Patients with CSD have usually suffered a scratch or bite from a cat or kitten which is infected with the bacteria Bartonella henselae, a common infection in young cats. It is also known as Rochalimaea henselae.
The bacteria is passed from cat to cat via fleas. In the absence of fleas, an infected cat cannot pass the infection to uninfected cats.
Once infected, the bacteria are present in saliva deposited in the cat’s fur and claws.
What are the clinical features of cat scratch disease?
The nearest lymph nodes become swollen and tender, most often those in the head, neck, and armpit. This is known as regional lymphadenopathy. The lymph nodes may swell to 10–12 cm in the first two weeks of the disease. On questioning, patients often recall being licked, bitten, or scratched by a cat in the previous 1–8 weeks.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Erythema of the initial spot may not be apparent in darker skin types. Instead, it could appear darker than the surrounding skin or violaceous/purple.
What are the complications of cat scratch disease?
Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome (POS), characterised by an inflamed lump in the eye and swollen lymph glands in front of the nearby ear
Bacillary angiomatosis, especially in HIV or otherwise immunocompromised patients
Bacillary hepatitis and splenitis (infection of the liver and spleen)
Erythema nodosum (red lumps on the shins)
Bacterial endocarditis
Encephalopathy is an uncommon complication of CSD that occurs one to six weeks after the lymph glands swell up. The abrupt symptoms of fever, seizures, and coma can be frightening. With hospitalisation and high doses of antibiotics, most patients recover completely.
Immunocompromised patients (such as solid organ transplant recipients or people with HIV) can present with atypical manifestations such as thrombocytopaenic purpura, haemophagocytosis, and visceral disease resembling lymphoproliferative disorders.
How is cat scratch disease diagnosed?
There is no single established ‘gold standard’ test to diagnose cat scratch disease.
Previously, diagnosis was often based on the presence of three of the four following criteria:
Regional lymphadenopathy, after excluding all other possible causes
Positive skin test for cat scratch disease — no longer used as the skin test antigen is not widely available and not as specific as other tools
Suggestive biopsy of skin or lymph node.
Diagnostic testing is not routinely performed if characteristic clinical signs are present, although may be indicated in those with atypical signs, unresolving systemic symptoms, or diagnostic uncertainty:
Serology — indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) can be performed to identify past or current infections depending on immunoglobulin G (IgG) titre levels
Culture — Bartonella henselae is a slow-growing gram-negative bacteria that can be grown from skin and blood samples
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based tests — testing for B. henselae can be performed on blood or tissue, however generally has poor sensitivity.
See also: Laboratory tests for bacterial infections.
What is the differential diagnosis for cat scratch disease?
Viral-associated lymphadenopathy – eg, associated with cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV
Mycobacterial infections
Other infective causes of lymphadenopathy – eg, Yersinia pestis, histoplasmosis, sporotrichosis, nocardiosis
Malignancy-related lymphadenopathy and lymphoma
Congenital or acquired cysts
Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease
What is the treatment for cat scratch disease?
Pain and fever can be managed by increasing fluid intake and simple analgesics. Warm moist compresses to affected lymph glands may decrease swelling and tenderness.
However, some studies suggest that certain antibiotics including azithromycin, doxycycline, gentamicin, rifampicin, trimethoprim + sulfamethoxazole, or ciprofloxacin may significantly shorten the duration of lymphadenopathy. Antibiotics are warranted in patients with severe or persistent symptoms, disseminated disease, or immunodeficiency.
How do you prevent cat scratch disease?
Wash hands thoroughly with water and soap after playing with a cat.
Wash any cat bites/scratches right away with running water.
Avoid petting or touching stray cats.
Avoid letting cats lick any open wounds.
Immunocompromised people should try to adopt cats older than 1 year of age.
Keep your cat’s claws trimmed.
Arrange regular routine check-ups for your cat with a veterinarian.
What is the outcome for cat scratch disease?
Cat scratch disease spontaneously resolves in approximately 90–95% of children, and is managed symptomatically with pain relief, antipyretics, and warm compresses. In disseminated infection, the recovery process might take several months to a year, and the extent of complications varies depending on which organ systems are affected. CSD can be debilitating in immunocompromised patients.
Alattas NH, Patel SN, Richardson SE, et al. Pediatric Bartonella henselae infection: the role of serologic diagnosis and a proposed clinical approach for suspected acute disease in the immunocompetent child. The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. 2020;39(11):984–9. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002852. Journal
Bhatti MT, Asif R, Bhatti LB. Macular star in neuroretinitis. Archives of Neurology. 2001;58(6):1008–9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.6.1008. Journal
Bos F, Chauveau B, Ruel J, et al. Serious and atypical presentations of Bartonella henselae infection in kidney transplant recipients. Open Forum Infectious Diseases. 2022;9(3):ofac059. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofac059. Journal
Prutsky G, Domecq JP, Mori L, et al. Treatment outcomes of human bartonellosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2013;17(10):e811-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2013.02.016. Journal
Shorbatli LA, Koranyi KI, Nahata MC. Effectiveness of antibiotic therapy in pediatric patients with cat scratch disease. International journal of clinical pharmacy. 2018;40(6):1458–61. doi: 10.1007/s11096-018-0746-1. Journal
Suhler EB, Lauer AK, Rosenbaum JT. Prevalence of serologic evidence of cat scratch disease in patients with neuroretinitis. Ophthalmology. 2000;107(5):871–6. doi: 10.1016/s0161-6420(00)00002-6. Journal
Vermeulen MJ, Diederen BM, Verbakel H, Peeters MF. Low sensitivity of Bartonella henselae PCR in serum samples of patients with cat-scratch disease lymphadenitis. Journal of medical microbiology. 2008 Aug;57(8):1049–50. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.2008/001024-0. Journal
Bacterial skin infections
Skin disorders in veterinarians and veterinary nurses
Cat Scratch Disease —Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cherry Angioma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cherry-angioma]
Cherry Angioma: Features, Causes, and Removal — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cherry angioma — extra information
Cherry haemangioma, Campbell de Morgan spot, Senile angioma, Senile ectasia, De Morgan spots, Campbell de Morgan angioma, Blood spots on skin, Senile naevus of skin
Blood vessel problems
Blood vessel problems
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, December 2017. Revised September 2020.
Introduction - angioma
Introduction - cherry angioma
Differential diagnoses
Angioma or haemangioma (American spelling ‘hemangioma’) describes a benign vascular skin lesion. An angioma is due to proliferating endothelial cells; these are the cells that line the inside of a blood vessel.
Angiomas can arise in early life (infantile haemangioma) or later in life; the most common type of angioma is a cherry angioma.
What is a cherry angioma?
A cherry angioma is a small papular angioma. It is a true capillary haemangioma. Cherry angioma has many synonyms, the most commonly used being Campbell de Morgan spots.
Cherry angiomas Cherry angioma Cherry angioma
Who gets cherry angioma?
What is the cause of cherry angioma?
The cause of cherry angiomas is unknown. Genetic analysis has found cherry angiomas frequently carry specific somatic missense mutations in the GNAQ and GNA11 (Q209H) genes, which are also involved in other vascular and melanocytic proliferations.
What are the clinical features of cherry angioma?
Cherry angioma is an asymptomatic firm red, blue, or purple papule, 0.1–1 cm in diameter. When thrombosed, it can appear black in colour until examined with a dermatoscope when the red or purple colour is more easily seen. Cherry angiomas are usually multiple. They are usually scattered over any part of the body surface, but are rarely found on the hands and feet or mucous membranes.
What is the differential diagnosis for cherry angioma?
Cherry angioma is usually easy to diagnose, but occasionally it may be confused with:
Spider telangiectasis
Nodular basal cell carcinoma
Amelanotic melanoma.
Spider telangiectasis, also known as spider naevus, is sometimes (incorrectly) called a spider angioma but this is a vascular dilatation and not a proliferation of endothelial cells.
What investigations should be done for cherry angioma?
Cherry angioma is usually diagnosed clinically and investigation is not necessary for the majority of lesions. It has a characteristic red-clod or lobular pattern on dermoscopy (called lacunar pattern using conventional pattern analysis).
Cherry angioma Cherry angioma
What is the treatment for cherry angioma?
Cherry angiomas are harmless, so do not have to be treated. Occasionally, they are removed to exclude a malignant skin lesion such as nodular melanoma.
Cherry angioma resembling nodular melanoma Cherry angioma resembling nodular melanoma
If desired for cosmetic reasons, a cherry angioma can be simply removed by one of the following methods:
Klebanov N, Lin WM, Artomov M, et al. Use of targeted next-generation sequencing to identify activating hot spot mutations in cherry angiomas. JAMA Dermatol. 2019;155(2):211-15. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2018.4231. Journal.
Corazza M, Dika E, Maietti E, Musmeci D, Patrizi A, Borghi A. Eruptive cherry angiomas and skin melanoma: a fortuitous association?. Melanoma Res. 2019;29(3):313-17. doi:10.1097/CMR.0000000000000563. PubMed
Valdebran M, Martin B, Kelly KM. State-of-the-art lasers and light treatments for vascular lesions: from red faces to vascular malformations. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2017;36(4):207-12. doi:10.12788/j.sder.2017.044. PubMed
Goldsmith PC. Dermatoses resulting from disorders of the veins and arteries. In:Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 103.12-13.
Common benign skin lesions
Cherry angioma pathology
Differential diagnosis of vascular lesions
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis
Cherry Hemangioma — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Chilblains]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/chilblains]
Chilblains (Pernio): Symptoms and Management — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Chilblains — extra information
Perniosis, Pernio, Erythema pernio, Chilblain
Blood vessel problems
Blood vessel problems
Authors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999; Updated and revised by: Dr Gia Toan Tang, RMO, Townsville University Hospital, Townsville, Australia; A/Prof Rosemary Nixon AM, Dermatologist, Skin Health Institute, Melbourne, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. February 2021.
Differential diagnoses
What are chilblains?
Chilblains are tender and/or itchy bumps on acral sites following exposure to damp, cold, non-freezing conditions causing a localised form of vasculitis. Chilblains are also called pernio or perniosis.
Who gets chilblains?
Chilblains can affect all age groups, but is most common in young to middle-aged adults, with a female predominance. Childhood chilblains are well-described but appear to be uncommon. Primary chilblains are unusual in the elderly and an underlying cause should be looked for.
Risk factors predisposing to the development of chilblains include:
Low body mass index and poor nutrition
Occupational hazard for outdoor workers, such as fishermen and farmers
Participation in ice-skating sports
Underlying bone marrow disorders eg, chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia
Underlying connective tissue disorders, particularly systemic lupus erythematosus (when it is called chilblain lupus), dermatomyositis, Behcet disease, cutaneous small vessel vasculitis, and discoid lupus erythematosus
Underlying acrocyanosis and primary or secondary Raynaud phenomenon
Familial tendency to developing chilblains.
Chilblains are seen in temperate climates rather than in countries with extreme cold where the air is often dry, and appropriate clothing and living conditions minimise the risk. Late winter and early spring, when it is wet and temperatures are above freezing, are the peak seasons for chilblains.
Chilblains and COVID-19
Suspected COVID-19 rash
What causes chilblains?
Cold causes constriction of small arteries and veins but a protective physiological reflex intermittently dilates the blood vessels to prevent skin ischaemia. Persistent or prolonged vasoconstriction due to an abnormal vascular reaction to cold may result in hypoxaemia and inflammation to produce chilblains.
What are the clinical features of chilblains?
Chilblains commonly occur on the fingers, toes, and ears (acral sites). However, chilblains can develop on any areas exposed to chronic cold, such as the thighs/hips of horse riders (‘equestrian panniculitis’). Chilblains develop several hours after exposure to damp cold and last for more than 24 hours.
Chilblains typically present as:
Itch and/or burning pain
Blanchable red/purple discolouration.
Dermoscopy is not very informative, but examination of the nailfold capillaries may be useful if an underlying connective tissue disease is suspected.
What are the complications of chilblains?
Severe chilblains may blister, or become eroded and ulcerated.
How are chilblains diagnosed?
Chilblains are usually diagnosed clinically. Investigations are sometimes required to exclude differential diagnoses or look for causes of secondary chilblains.
Skin biopsy of primary idiopathic chilblains shows a superficial and deep lymphocytic vasculitis, lymphocytes around the eccrine sweat glands, subepidermal oedema, with or without interface changes. [see Perniosis pathology].
The Mayo Clinic has developed diagnostic criteria for chilblains:
Major criterion (required) — localised redness and swelling of acral sites lasting at least 24 hours.
Minor criteria (at least one of the following):
Onset and/or worsening in cooler months
Histopathology consistent with chilblains
Improvement with warming and drying.
Chilblains are classified as idiopathic (primary) if there is no associated cause, and secondary if a cause can be identified.
Investigations for secondary causes of chilblains may include:
ANA, rheumatoid factor, antiphospholipid antibodies
Protein electrophoresis
Cold agglutinins and, in children, cryoglobulins.
What is the differential diagnosis for chilblains?
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Lupus pernio (sarcoidosis)
Lupus chilblains Lupus pernio Microgeodic disease
What is the treatment for chilblains?
Prevention of chilblains
Avoiding cold, wet environments if possible
Wearing warm, dry clothing during cold weather to protect hands, feet, and ears
Vigorous exercise to keep warm and improve circulation
Keep indoor areas warm and dry
Soaking hands in warm water before exposure
Cessation of smoking and other vasoconstrictors
Topical nitroglycerine 0.2%
Topical betamethasone valerate 0.1% twice daily — may relieve itch
Nifedipine 20–60 mg per day — hastens healing time and reduces the risk of relapse
What is the outcome for chilblains?
Chilblains usually resolve spontaneously in 1–3 weeks. However, chilblains can become chronic. Recurrences may occur with subsequent exposures or annually.
Arora JS, Kesler A, Min MS. A global retrospective study identifies higher rates of pernio in individuals with connective tissue disease. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;92(3):636-640. Pubmed
Aschoff R, Zimmermann N, Beissert S, Günther C. Type I interferon signature in chilblain-like lesions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Dermatopathology (Basel). 2020;7(3):57–63. doi:10.3390/dermatopathology7030010. PubMed
Baeck M, Herman A. COVID toes: where do we stand with the current evidence?. Int J Infect Dis. 2021;102:53–5. doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.10.021. PubMed
Ladha MA, Luca N, Constantinescu C, Naert K, Ramien ML. Approach to chilblains during the COVID-19 pandemic. J Cutan Med Surg. 2020;24(5):504–17. doi:10.1177/1203475420937978. PubMed
Neri I, Virdi A, Corsini I, et al. Major cluster of paediatric 'true' primary chilblains during the COVID-19 pandemic: a consequence of lifestyle changes due to lockdown. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2020;34(11):2630–5. doi:10.1111/jdv.16751. PubMed
Nyssen A, Benhadou F, Magnée M, André J, Koopmansch C, Wautrecht JC. Chilblains. Vasa. 2020;49(2):133–40. doi:10.1024/0301-1526/a000838. PubMed
Patterson JW. Weedon’s Skin Pathology, 5th edn. Elsevier, 2020. p290.
Singh H, Kaur H, Singh K, Sen CK. Cutaneous manifestations of COVID-19: a systematic review. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle). 2021;10(2):51–80. doi:10.1089/wound.2020.1309. PubMed
Smith ML. Environmental and sports-related skin diseases. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L (eds). Dermatology [2 volumes], 4th edn. Elsevier, 2017: 1569–94.
Sohier P, Matar S, Meritet JF, Laurent-Roussel S, Dupin N, Aractingi S. Histopathological features of chilblain-like lesions developing in the setting of the COVID-19 pandemic. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2020;10.5858/arpa.2020-0613-SA. doi:10.5858/arpa.2020-0613-SA. PubMed
Blistering skin conditions
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Pernio – Medscape dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Chondrodermatitis Nodularis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/chondrodermatitis-nodularis]
Chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis (CNH)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Chondrodermatitis nodularis
Chondrodermatitis nodularis — extra information
CNH, Chondrodermatitis nodularis, CDNH, Winkler disease, Nodular chondrodermatitis, Chondrodermatitis nodularis antihelicis
76583009, 402699002, 403432008
Chondrodermatitis nodularis
Author: Dr Anita Eshraghi, Dermatologist, Sweden. DermNet Editor-in-Chief Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Original page by Dr Oakley was published in 1997. Updated August 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is chondrodermatitis nodularis?
Chondrodermatitis nodularis is a common inflammatory condition which affects the skin and cartilage of the helix or antihelix of the ear.
Chondrodermatitis nodularis is sometimes called Winkler disease, after the dermatologist who described it in 1915. It is also called nodular chondrodermatitis, chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis, and chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis.
Who gets chondrodermatitis nodularis?
What causes chondrodermatitis nodularis?
The exact cause of chondrodermatitis nodularis is still unknown. There are several factors that contribute to its development.
Repeated pressure and compromised blood supply to the ear (predominantly in people who sleep on one side)
Exposure to cold and sun
Trauma from headphones, mobile devices or hearing aids
Connective tissue disease (eg,lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, and scleroderma)
Chondrodermatitis Chondrodermatitis Image provided by Dr Trevor Evans
What are the clinical features of chondrodermatitis nodularis?
Chondrodermatitis nodularis is a solitary, firm, and oval-shaped nodule, 4–6 mm in diameter, with central crust and surrounding erythema.
In men, the most common site for CNH is the helix, while in women it is more often found on the antihelix.
It is typically unilateral, located on the sleeping side, but can be bilateral.
CNH is painful and tender. Pain at night may prevent sleeping on the affected side.
The lesion can bleed or discharge a small amount of scaly material.
How is chondrodermatitis nodularis diagnosed?
Sometimes an excision biopsy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis (see Chondrodermatis nodularis pathology).
What is the differential diagnosis for chondrodermatitis nodularis?
The differential diagnosis for CNH depends on the clinical findings. Other diagnoses to consider include:
Squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma
What is the treatment for chondrodermatitis nodularis?
Protective padding at night can relieve pressure on the area affected by CNH.
Try to avoid sleeping on one side only.
Select a soft pillow.
Consider fashioning a ‘hole’ in the pillow to avoid pressure on the painful area.
Foam rubber or a bath sponge can be used to make a chondrodermatitis nodularis ear protector to wear at night, held in place with an elastic headband (or purchase an ear protector from a medical supplies company).
Wear a warm hat over the ears when outside in the cold and wind.
Apply petroleum jelly or an antiseptic ointment under a light dressing, especially if the chondrodermatitis nodularis is ulcerated or infected.
Intralesional steroid injection
A steroid injection of triamcinolone acetonide may reduce local inflammation.
A filler such as collagen or hyaluronic acid can be injected under the skin above the cartilage to provide a cushioning layer.
Topical nitroglycerin
Nitroglycerin ointment (containing 1–2% glyceryl trinitrate) causes relaxation and vasodilation of the arteriolar smooth muscle and can reverse the ischaemic changes seen in chondrodermatitis nodularis.
Apply twice daily to the affected area.
Side effects include a transient headache and skin irritation.
Surgical options may include:
Removal of skin and cartilage with minimal margins
Excision by punch biopsy, with full-thickness skin grafting
Curettage to remove the affected tissue, which is left to heal by secondary intention.
Unfortunately, CNH has a 10–30% recurrence rate after surgery.
What is the outcome for chondrodermatitis nodularis?
CNH usually resolves within a few months. It can recur.
Sanu A, Koppana R, Snow DG. Management of chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis using a ‘doughnut pillow’ Journal of Laryngology and Otology. 2007;121(11):1096–8. doi: 10.1017/s0022215107008535. PubMed
Kuen-Spiegl M, Ratzinger G, Sepp N, Fritsch P. Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis—a conservative therapeutic approach by decompression. Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft. 2011;9(4):292–6. doi: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2010.07572.x. PubMed
Rex J, Ribera M, Bielsa I, Mangas C, Xifra A, Ferrándiz C. Narrow elliptical skin excision and cartilage shaving for treatment of chondrodermatitis nodularis. Dermatologic Surgery. 2006;32(3):400–4. doi: 10.1111/j.1524-4725.2006.32080.x. PubMed
Ortiz A, Martín P, Domínguez J, Conejo-Mir J. Cell phone-induced chondrodermatitis nodularis antihelicis. Actas Dermo-Sifiliográficas. 2015;106(8):675–6. doi: 10.1016/j.adengl.2015.07.003. PubMed
Chondrodermatitis nodularis pathology
Chondrodermatitis Nodularis Helicis — Medscape Reference
Chondrodermatitis nodularis — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Comedonal Acne]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/comedonal-acne]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Comedonal acne — extra information
Author: Reviewed and updated by Dr Amanda Oakley Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, and Clare Morrison, Copy Editor, April 2014.
Introduction - comedones
Comedones are the skin-coloured, small bumps (papules) frequently found on the forehead and chin of those with acne. A single lesion is a comedo.
Open comedones are blackheads; black because of surface pigment (melanin), rather than dirt
Closed comedones are whiteheads; the follicle is completely blocked
Microcomedones are so small that they are not visible to the naked eye
Macrocomedones are facial closed comedones that are larger than 2–3 mm in diameter
A giant comedo is a type of cyst in which there is a clear blackhead-like opening in the skin
Solar comedones are found on the cheeks and chin of older people, and are thought to be due to sun damage
Open comedones Closed comedones Giant comedo
What is comedonal acne?
Comedonal acne is a pattern of acne in which most lesions are comedones. Comedonal acne most often affects the forehead and chin.
Open comedones Comedonal acne Comedonal acne
What causes comedones?
Comedones arise when cells lining the sebaceous duct proliferate (cornification), and there is increased sebum production. A comedo is formed by the debris blocking the sebaceous duct and hair follicle. It is now known that comedones also involve inflammation (see causes of acne).
The development of comedones may involve the following factors:
Excessive activity of the male sex hormone 5-testosterone (DHT) within skin cells
Reduced linoleate (the salt of the essential fatty acid, linoleic acid) in sebum causing more scale and reduced barrier function
Proinflammatory cytokines (cell signalling proteins), such as Interleukin 1 (IL-1) and IL-8, produced by cells lining the follicle in response to activation of the innate immune system
Free fatty acids made from sebum by acne bacteria
Overhydrated skin premenstrually, from moisturisers or in humid conditions
Rupture of the follicle by injury such as squeezing pimples, abrasive washing, chemical peels or laser treatments
Smoking – comedonal acne is more common in smokers than in non-smokers
Certain dietary factors may contribute to comedonal acne, particularly milk products and high glycaemic-index foods (sugars and fats)
What is the treatment for comedonal acne?
If you have comedonal acne, choose oil-free cosmetics and wash twice daily with a mild soap and water. It is best to stop smoking and to have a diet that is low in sugar, fat and dairy products.
Choose "comedolytic" topical medications. These should be applied once or twice daily as a thin smear to the entire area affected. It may take several weeks to months before worthwhile improvement occurs. Treatment needs to be continued long-term (sometimes for many years).
Suitable topical agents include:
Salicylic acid +/- sulfur and resorcinol
Retinoids such as tretinoin, isotretinoin, adapalene (these require a doctor's prescription)
Prescription oral medications for comedonal acne include:
Antibiotics can also improve comedonal acne but are usually prescribed for inflammatory acne (acne vulgaris).
Surgical treatments are sometimes recommended to remove persistent comedones:
Electrosurgery (cautery or diathermy)
Electrosurgery to comedones
Acne Vulgaris — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cryotherapy]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cryotherapy]
Cryotherapy: Uses, Cautions, and Aftercare — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cryotherapy — extra information
Liquid nitrogen therapy, Carbon dioxide snow therapy, Dry ice therapy
26782000, 49987006, 302396003, 363010000
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by: Dr Jacqueline Kim Nguyen, Resident, St Vincent’s Hospital, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. August 2022
Benefits and disadvantages
Side-effects and complications
What is cryotherapy?
Cryotherapy is a minimally-invasive treatment that freezes skin surface lesions using extremely cold liquid or instruments (cryogen).
Cryotherapy, also known as cryosurgery or cryoablation, can be delivered with various cryogens. Liquid nitrogen is the most common and effective cryogen for clinical use (temperature –196°C).
Other cryogens include:
Carbon dioxide snow (–78.5°C)
Dimethyl ether and propane or DMEP (–57°C).
Cryotherapy is an effective alternative to more invasive treatment options as it is inexpensive, simple, relatively safe, and can be performed quickly in an outpatient setting.
What is cryotherapy used for?
Benign lesions that may be treated by cryotherapy include:
Seborrhoeic keratoses
Molluscum contagiosum
Dermatologists can freeze small skin cancers such as superficial basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and in-situ squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) on the trunks and limbs, but this is not always successful, so careful follow-up is necessary.
What are the contraindications with cryotherapy?
Cryotherapy should not be used for:
Undiagnosed skin lesions
Dark-skinned patients
Lesions which require tissue pathology
Lesions within a circulation-compromised area
Patients with previous adverse reactions to cryotherapy or unable to accept side effects
Unconscious patients
Conditions exacerbated by cold exposure:
How does cryotherapy work?
Cryotherapy works by using a cryogen to cool the targeted lesion to sub-zero temperatures causing direct tissue necrosis. The thawing process induces osmolarity changes which also results in tissue damage.
Cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen involves the use of a cryospray, cryoprobe, or a cotton-tipped applicator. The dose, freeze-time, and delivery method depend on the location, depth, size, and tissue type of the lesion.
Liquid nitrogen spray methods include:
Timed spot freeze technique/direct spray technique (standard treatment)
Rotary or spiral spray.
A liquid nitrogen storage vessel - the room is ventilated and has an oxygen monitor. Gloves and goggles are used when filling smaller units for clinic use Large cotton swabs used for cryotherapy Cryotherapy spray Redness and oedema 4 hrs after cryotherapy The ice ball just as the cryotherapy is discontinued – it will thaw in 15-30 seconds Cryotherapy eschar
Carbon dioxide cryotherapy involves making a cylinder of frozen carbon dioxide snow or a slush combined with acetone. It is applied directly to the skin lesion.
DMEP comes in an aerosol can and is often available over-the-counter. It is used to treat warts using a foam applicator pushed onto the skin lesion for 10–40 seconds, depending on its size and site.
What are the benefits and disadvantages of cryotherapy?
Cryotherapy is a simple and relatively safe procedure, however, it can require several treatments to work. The resultant pain can also hinder compliance.
Actinic and seborrheic keratoses
Benign lesions secondary to sun damage can be highly amenable to cryosurgery.
Actinic keratoses often only require one freeze-thaw cycle with complete cure rates varying from 39%– 83%.
Seborrheic keratoses may require longer treatment times and multiple freeze-thaw cycles if lesions are thicker.
Clearance rates of verrucous lesions can vary depending on the degree of hyperkeratosis and size of the wart.
Several treatment sessions may be needed and the overall cure rate varies from 39% to 84% at three months.
Favourable response rates have been reported with keratolytic pre-treatment.
Malignant lesions: BCCs and SCCs
Cryosurgery is not a first-line treatment for cancerous lesions such as BCCs and SCCs, but is an option for low-risk lesions.
Malignant lesions typically require multiple freeze-thaw cycles and ice field margins of 3–5mm beyond the lesion.
Recurrence rates can vary from 6% to 34%, thus requiring regular follow-up as it can be difficult to identify recurrence and achieve margin control.
What are the side effects, risks, and complications of cryotherapy?
Oedema — periorbital, forehead, lips
Blistering — clear and haemorrhagic
A cryotherapy blister 48 hrs after treatment Haemorrhagic blisters 3 days after treatment Eyelid oedema 24 hrs after cryotherapy to the lesion adjacent to the nose
Secondary wound infections
Infection can present as increased pain, swelling, thick yellow blister fluid, purulent discharge, and/or redness around the treated area.
Treated with topical antiseptics and oral antibiotics.
Nitrogen emphysema (rare)
Local nerve damage (usually temporary)
Permanent hypopigmentation or scar
Persistent or recurrent skin lesions, necessitating further cryotherapy, surgery, or other treatment.
Recurrent BCC post-cryotherapy
Looking after the treated area
It is important to provide patients with postoperative wound care instructions and complications to be aware of.
Usually, no special attention is needed during the healing phase. The treated area may be gently washed once or twice daily with soap and water and should be kept clean. A dressing is optional but is advisable if the affected area is subject to trauma or clothes rub on it.
Immediate swelling and redness may be reduced by:
A topical steroid applied on a single occasion directly after freezing
Oral aspirin for inflammation and discomfort.
The treated area is likely to blister within a few hours, depending on the depth and duration of the freeze. It may contain clear fluid or blood (this is harmless).
Treatment near the eye may result in a puffy eyelid, especially the following morning, but the swelling settles within a few days. A scab will then form and the blister gradually dries up.
When the blister dries to a scab, apply petroleum jelly and avoid picking at the scab. The scab peels off after 5–10 days on the face and 3 weeks on the hand. A sore or scab may persist as long as 3 months on the lower leg because healing in this site is often slow.
Clebak KT, Mendez-Miller M, Croad J. Cutaneous Cryosurgery for Common Skin Conditions. Am Fam Physician. 2020;101(7):399–406. Journal
Cranwell WC, Sinclair R. Optimising cryosurgery technique. Aust Fam Physician. 2017;46(5):270–4. Journal
Prohaska J, Jan AH. Cryotherapy. StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL) 2022. Resource
Liquid nitrogen/cryotherapy guidelines
Common skin lesions. Non-surgical physical treatments
Seborrhoeic keratoses
Molluscum contagiosum
Cryotherapy — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cutaneous Horn]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cutaneous-horn]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cutaneous horn — extra information
Cornu cutaneum, Keratin horn
Author: Dr Tina Tian, Medical Oncology Registrar, Hawke's Bay Hospital, Hastings, New Zealand, 2013.
Diagnosis and investigation
What is a cutaneous horn?
A cutaneous horn (cornu cutaneum) is a hard conical projection from the skin, made of compact keratin. They are so named as they resemble an animal’s horn. They arise from benign, premalignant or malignant skin lesions.
Cutaneous horn Cutaneous horn Cutaneous horn
Who gets a cutaneous horn?
A cutaneous horn is more common in older patients, with the peak incidence in those between 60 and 70.
They are equally common in males and females, although there is a higher risk of the lesion being malignant in men.
They are more common in people with fairer skins (skin phototype I and 2).
What causes a cutaneous horn?
Around half of horns have a benign base, and half are premalignant or malignant. The most common underlying lesions are seborrhoeic keratosis, viral warts (due to human papillomavirus), actinic keratosis, and well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (associated with exposure to the sun and other sources of UV radiation).
What are the clinical features of a cutaneous horn?
A cutaneous horn generally presents as a straight or curved, hard, yellow-brown projection from the skin.
It can be surrounded by normal skin or have a border of thickened skin.
The side of the horn may be terrace-like or oyster shell-like with horizontal ridges.
The base of the horn may be flat, protruding, or like a crater.
Inflammation may be present, due to recurrent injury.
Typically, the horn is taller than twice the width at the base.
It may vary from a few millimetres to several centimetres in size.
Giant horns exist — the largest described is a 76-year-old Parisian woman named Madame Dimanche (Widow Sunday) in the 19th century, who grew a horn from her forehead that was 25-cm long.
Cutaneous horns are usually singular but can be multiple.
They can occur anywhere on the body, but are more common on sun-exposed areas especially the head and ears, back of hands and forearms.
They may also occur on the chest, neck, shoulder and penis.
Cutaneous horns are usually asymptomatic. They can be injured causing pain and inflammation.
Worrying features suggestive of malignancy
Whilst no certain features can confidently confirm or exclude malignant lesions, malignant lesions are more common in older patients and in males compared to females. Squamous cell carcinoma is also likely if the horn has the following features:
Induration at the base
The anatomic site on the nose, ears, backs of hands, scalp, forearms, face and penis
Wide base or low height to base ratio
Redness at the base of the horn base
Lack of terrace formation, due to rapid unorganised growth.
Diagnosis and investigation of cutaneous horn
A cutaneous horn is diagnosed by its clinical appearance.
Histological examination of the horn base is crucial to rule out malignancy, as there are no certain clinical features that can definitively distinguish benign lesions from skin cancer.
On histology, there is a thickening of the stratum corneum or hyperkeratosis. Orderly horizontal parallel layers of keratin are associated more with benign lesions. Rapidly growing malignant lesions exhibit more erratic growth. Acanthosis is often noted. The base of the lesion shows features of the underlying lesion.
Skin conditions associated with cutaneous horns
Premalignant or malignant
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Molluscum contagiosum
Ostraceous psoriasis
Hypertrophic lichen planus
Intraepidermal carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
How is a cutaneous horn treated?
Cutaneous horns are usually excised with appropriate margins, dependent of the nature of the lesion.
Yu RC, Pryce DW, Macfarlane AW, Stewart TW. A histopathological study of 643 cutaneous horns. Br J Dermatol. May 1991;124(5):449–52. PubMed
Pyne J, Sapkota D, Wong JC. Cutaneous horns: clues to invasive squamous cell carcinoma being present in the horn base. Dermatol Pract Concept 2013;3(2):2. PubMed
Copcu E, Sivrioglu N, Culhaci N. Cutaneous horns: are these lesions as innocent as they seem to be? World J Surg Oncol. 2004:3(2):18. PubMed
Cutaneous Horn — Medscape Reference
Squamous cell carcinoma
Cutaneous horn — Skinsight
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cutaneous-lupus-erythematosus]
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory, Rashes
L93, L93.0, L93.1, L93.2, M32, M32.9
EB5Z, 4A40.00, EB51, EB51.Y, EB50, EB51.0
7119001, 838359008, 239891002, 15084002, 200941006, 200938002, 238927000, 95332009, 238928005
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Author: Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2001/2016
DermNet Update April 2021; further minor update September 2024.
Variation in skin types
What is cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus (LE) is a diverse group of autoimmune connective tissue disorders localised to the skin that can be associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) to varying degrees.
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE) is classified as:
Intermittent (lupus tumidus)
Chronic (CCLE) eg, discoid lupus (DLE), lupus profundus, chilblain lupus erythematosus.
Acute cutaneous LE Subacute cutaneous LE Chronic cutaneous LE
Skin lesions of cutaneous lupus erythematosus can be subdivided into:
Lupus-specific changes
Clinical signs diagnostic of, or unique to, LE
Histology is diagnostic for LE; vacuolar interface dermatitis
Lupus-nonspecific changes
Clinical signs found not only in LE, but also in other connective tissue diseases
Histology is not diagnostic for LE; reactive patterns seen.
Who gets cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
As with SLE, there is a marked female predominance with CLE particularly affecting women 20 to 50 years of age. However, all age groups and both sexes can be affected. Skin of colour is an important predisposing factor.
Up to 75% of patients with SLE develop cutaneous signs, and these may be the first indication of SLE in 25%.
What causes cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
The pathogenesis of cutaneous lupus erythematosus is multifactorial:
Genetic susceptibility
High incidence among family members
Environmental factors
Innate and adaptive immune responses
What are the clinical features of cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
This is a brief overview of the clinical features of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. See the specific lupus pages for more detail – links are provided at the end under the ‘On DermNet’ heading.
Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus typically presents as transient erythematous patches associated with a flare of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Lupus-specific skin changes:
Localised acute CLE: malar ‘butterfly' rash – redness and swelling over both cheeks, sparing the nasolabial folds, lasting hours to days
Generalised acute CLE: diffuse or papular erythema of the face, upper limbs (sparing the knuckles), and trunk resembling a morbilliform drug eruption or viral exanthem
Toxic epidermal necrolysis-like acute CLE: is associated with lupus nephritis or cerebritis, and must be distinguished from drug-induced toxic epidermal necrolysis in a patient with SLE.
Malar 'butterfly' rash Papular erythema of generalised ACLE Sparing of knuckles
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus is less commonly associated with SLE with approximately 50% having a mild form of SLE. It is thought 20–40% have drug-induced SCLE. It comprises 10–15% of cutaneous LE presentations. The skin changes are more persistent than those of ACLE.
Skin lesions of SCLE:
Occur on the trunk and upper limbs, triggered or aggravated by sun exposure
Present as a psoriasiform papulosquamous rash or annular, polycyclic plaques with central clearing
Resolve to leave dyspigmentation and telangiectases, but no scarring.
Intermittent cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Intermittent CLE is better known as lupus tumidus, a dermal form of lupus erythematosus.
Skin lesions of lupus tumidus:
Occur on sun-exposed areas of skin, such as the face, neck, and upper anterior chest
Present as erythematous, round or annular, papules and plaques with a smooth surface
Resolve in winter without scarring.
Lupus tumidus, smooth red nodule on the cheek
Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus is the most common form of CCLE (80%) and is particularly prevalent and severe in patients with skin of colour. Only 1–2% of patients with localised DLE progress to SLE.
Skin lesions of DLE:
Are most commonly located on the scalp, ears, cheeks, nose, and lips
Present as destructive scaly plaques with follicular prominence (carpet tack sign) which can result in scarring alopecia
Heal slowly leaving post-inflammatory dyspigmentation and scarring.
Discoid LE Discoid lupus erythematosus Discoid lupus erythematosus
Lupus profundus is a mostly lobular panniculitis without vasculitis.
Skin lesions of lupus profundus:
Can develop at any site
Present as persistent, firm, deep, tender nodules
Resolve to leave dents in the skin due to atrophy of the fat.
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Chilblain lupus erythematosus is an under-reported form of chronic CLE involving mainly the fingers and toes of smokers triggered by exposure to a moist cold environment. It may be familial with no association to SLE, or sporadic which can be associated with SLE.
Skin lesions of chilblain lupus:
Are often pruritic and painful
May ulcerate or develop hyperkeratotic fissuring
May heal leaving depigmentation and atrophic spindling of the distal phalange.
Chilblain lupus Lupus tumidus
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Some forms of cutaneous lupus erythematosus, such as bullous lupus erythematosus and discoid lupus erythematosus, are particularly associated with skin of colour.
Dyspigmentation and scarring are complications of CLE that significantly impact quality of life for patients with skin of colour.
Malar 'butterfly' rash of SLE Discoid LE Discoid LE with dyspigmentation and scarring
Non-specific cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Non-scarring diffuse hair loss (unruly lupus hair)
Nailfold telangiectases
Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
Mouth ulcers and cheilitis.
Unruly lupus hair Cheilitis Livedo reticularis
What are the complications of cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
Progression to SLE and the complications of SLE
Dyspigmentation [see Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation]
Permanent (cicatricial) hair loss
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
Neonatal lupus erythematosus in baby of female patient with Ro and/or La autoantibodies
Impact on quality of life [see Psychological effects of cutaneous lupus erythematosus]
Facial scarring and dyspigmentation of DLE Scarring alopecia of DLE Neonatal lupus erythematosus
How is cutaneous lupus erythematosus diagnosed?
Skin biopsy — diagnostic histopathology and direct immunofluorescence is seen only in specific-LE lesions [see Discoid lupus erythematosus pathology]
Blood tests — full blood count, renal function test, inflammatory markers
Serology — including ANA, ENA – are often negative in chronic CLE
Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index (CLASI)
The Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index scores activity and damage in each of 12 anatomical locations.
The total activity score:
Degree of redness (0-3) and scale (0-2)
Mucous membrane involvement (0-1)
Recent hair loss (0-1), nonscarring alopecia (0-3)
Degree of dyspigmentation (0-2) and scarring (0-2)
Persistence of dyspigmentation more than 12 months doubles the dyspigmentation score
Scalp scarring (0, 3, 4, 5, 6).
What is the treatment for cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
Sun protection and avoidance: SPF 50+ broad spectrum sunscreen, UPF 50+ sun-protective clothing
Vitamin D supplement
Intralesional steroids
Antimalarials, usually hydroxychloroquine; there is also some evidence that hydroxychloroquine may reduce the risk of progression to SLE.
Immune modulators such as methotrexate, mycophenolate, dapsone, ciclosporin; there is evidence of successful treatment with anifrolumab
Systemic corticosteroids
Anifrolumab is a type 1 interferon receptor subunit blocker that has shown efficacy in systemic lupus as well as severe cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Belimumab is a B lymphocyte stimulator specific inhibitor and is licensed for both SLE and lupus nephritis, and may benefit recalcitrant cutaneous LE.
What is the outcome for cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus can be the presenting sign of SLE, as in acute CLE, or may evolve into SLE.
Female patients with CLE and Ro/La autoantibodies should be advised of the risk their baby may have neonatal lupus erythematosus including congenital heart block.
Chronic CLE tends to follow a chronic relapsing course for years, with flares in spring and summer, and resolution with scarring if untreated.
Arora JS, Kesler A, Min MS. A global retrospective study identifies higher rates of pernio in individuals with connective tissue disease. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;92(3):636-640. Pubmed
Chakka S, Krain RL, Concha JSS, Chong BF, Merola JF, Werth VP. The CLASI, a validated tool for the evaluation of skin disease in lupus erythematosus: a narrative review. Ann Transl Med. 2021;9(5):431. doi:10.21037/atm-20-5048. Journal
Filotico R, Mastrandrea V. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: clinico-pathologic correlation. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2018;153(2):216–29. doi:10.23736/S0392-0488.18.05929-1. Journal
Garelli CJ, Refat MA, Nanaware PP, Ramirez-Ortiz ZG, Rashighi M, Richmond JM. Current insights in cutaneous lupus erythematosus immunopathogenesis. Front Immunol. 2020;11:1353. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.01353. Journal
Goodfield M, Dutz J, McCourt C. Lupus erythematosus. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology, 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 51.1–39.
Hersh AO, Arkin LM, Prahalad S. Immunogenetics of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2016;28(4):470–5. doi:10.1097/MOP.0000000000000383. PubMed Central
Jafari AJ, McGee C, Klimas N, Hebert AA. Monoclonal Antibodies for the Management of Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus: An Update on the Current Treatment Landscape. Clin Exp Dermatol. Published online September 7, 2024. Journal
Little AJ, Vesely MD. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: current and future pathogenesis-directed therapies. Yale J Biol Med. 2020;93(1):81–95. PubMed Central
Petty AJ, Floyd L, Henderson C, Nicholas MW. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: progress and challenges. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2020;20(5):12. doi:10.1007/s11882-020-00906-8. PubMed Central
Stannard JN, Kahlenberg JM. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: updates on pathogenesis and associations with systemic lupus. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2016;28(5):453–9. doi:10.1097/BOR.0000000000000308. PubMed Central
Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus pathology
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus
Neonatal lupus erythematosus
Psychological effects of cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Lupus Foundation of America
Lupus Support Group (New Zealand)
Systemic lupus erythematosus — Medscape
Subacute lupus erythematosus — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Cutaneous Vasculitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/cutaneous-vasculitis]
Cutaneous Vasculitis: Classification, Causes, and Features — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Cutaneous vasculitis
Cutaneous vasculitis — extra information
Vasculitis of the skin
Blood vessel problems
EF40.Z, 4A44.BO, EF40.2Y, EF40.1Y, EF40.0
238785001, 238787009, 402664001, 718217000, 85461008
Blood vessel problems
Cutaneous vasculitis
Author: Dr Amy Stanway, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2003. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, January 2016.
What is cutaneous vasculitis?
Cutaneous vasculitis is a group of disorders in which there are inflamed blood vessels in the skin. These may include capillaries, venules, arterioles and lymphatics.
Cutaneous vasculitis has several different causes
There are a wide variety of clinical presentations.
It is associated with systemic vasculitis in a minority of patients
Classification of cutaneous vasculitis
Progressive pigmented purpura: the most common form of capillaritis
Pigmented purpuric lichenoid dermatosis
Purpura annularis telangiectodes
Small vessel vasculitis
Idiopathic, drug or infection-induced cutaneous small vessel vasculitis (hypersensitivity vasculitis)
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Acute haemorrhagic oedema of infancy
Urticarial vasculitis
Exercise-induced vasculitis
Erythema elevatum diutinum
Lymphocytic thrombophilic arteritis
Malignant atrophic papulosis (Degos)
Recurrent cutaneous necrotising eosinophilic vasculitis
ANCA-associated vasculitis
Microscopic polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis / Churg-Strauss
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Medium vessel vasculitis
Cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa
Large vessel vasculitis
Giant cell arteritis
Who gets cutaneous vasculitis?
Cutaneous vasculitis can affect people of all ages and races. Some types of vasculitis have a predilection for certain age groups.
Acute haemorrhagic oedema affects infants
Henoch–Schönlein purpura affects children
Hypersensitivity vasculitis affects adults
Older people are more likely to have diseases and medications that are potential causes of small vessel vasculitis
What causes vasculitis?
Many different insults may cause an identical inflammatory response within the blood vessel wall. Three main mechanisms are proposed.
Direct injury to the vessel wall by bacteria or viruses
Indirect injury by activation of antibodies
Indirect injury through activation of complement, a group of proteins in the blood and tissue fluids that attack infection and foreign bodies.
What are the clinical features of vasculitis?
Clinical presentation of cutaneous vasculitis mainly depends on the size of the inflamed blood vessel.
Capillaritis presents as pigmented purpura, characterised by petechiae resolving with haemosiderin deposition.
Small vessel vasculitis is characterised by palpable purpura.
Medium vessel vasculitis is associated with nodules and livedo reticularis.
Large vessel vasculitis infrequently results in cutaneous features.
Cutaneous vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis
How is cutaneous vasculitis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of vasculitis can often be made on the basis of its appearance without requiring any further tests. Sometimes a skin biopsy is performed to confirm the diagnosis but this rarely explains what caused it, as vasculitis is the common endpoint of many different events.
What is the treatment for vasculitis?
Treatment depends on the severity of the disease and may include general measures, systemic corticosteroids, and immune-modulating agents.
If cutaneous vasculitis is a manifestation of systemic vasculitis then treatment of the systemic disorder is required.
What is the outlook for cutaneous vasculitis?
The prognosis of systemic vasculitis is dependent upon the severity of involvement of other organs. If vasculitis affects the kidneys, lungs or brain it can be life-threatening.
Chen KR, Carlson JA. Clinical approach to cutaneous vasculitis. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2008;9(2):71–92. doi:10.2165/00128071-200809020-00001 PubMed
Martins-Martinho J, Dourado E, Khmelinskii N, Espinosa P, Ponte C. Localized forms of vasculitis. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2021;23(7):49.  doi:10.1007/s11926-021-01012-y Journal
Micheletti RG, Pagnoux C. Management of cutaneous vasculitis. Presse Med. 2020;49(3):104033. doi:10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104033 PubMed
Sunderkötter CH, Zelger B, Chen KR, et al. Nomenclature of cutaneous vasculitis: dermatologic addendum to the 2012 Revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018;70(2):171–84. doi:10.1002/art.40375 PubMed
Vascular skin problems
Cutaneous small vessel vasculitis
Direct immunofluorescence
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Dermatological emergencies — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Hypersensitivity Vasculitis — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Dermatologic Manifestations of Urticarial Vasculitis — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Cutaneous vasculitis — British Association of Dermatologists
The Vasculitis Foundation
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Darier Disease]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/darier-disease]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Darier disease — extra information
Keratosis follicularis, Darier-White disease, MIM 124200
EC20.2LC00.Y, EC20.Y
48611009, 403787005, 403788000, 403785002, 400018004, 400085009
Author: Dr Amy Stanway, Registrar, Department of Dermatology, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2002. Updated by Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, October 2016.
Prognosis and complications
What is Darier disease?
Darier disease is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder classified as a hereditary acantholytic dermatosis. Darier disease typically presents with scaly crusted papules in a seborrhoeic distribution and in skin folds.
Also known as Darier–White disease, Darier disease was previously called ‘keratosis follicularis’, but this is incorrect because the scaly papules do not arise from hair follicles.
Who gets Darier disease?
The onset of skin changes is usually in adolescence. Darier disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that a single gene passed from one parent causes the condition. The chance of a child inheriting the abnormal gene if one parent is affected is 1 in 2 (50%) but not all people with the abnormal gene will develop clinical features of the disease.
What is the cause of Darier disease?
The abnormal gene in Darier disease has been identified as ATP2A2, found on chromosome 12q23-24.1. This gene codes for the SERCA enzyme or pump (SarcoEndoplasmic Reticulum Calcium-ATPase) that is required to transport calcium within the cell. The exact mechanism by which this abnormal gene causes the disease is still under investigation but it appears that the way in which skin cells join together may be disrupted. The skin cells (keratinocytes) stick together via structures called desmosomes and it seems the desmosomes do not assemble properly if there is insufficient calcium.
How is Darier disease diagnosed?
Usually, Darier disease is diagnosed by its appearance and family history, but it is often is mistaken for other skin problems.
Diagnosis may require a skin biopsy. The histology is characteristic, known as focal acantholytic dyskeratosis associated with varying degrees of papillomatosis. The pathological features are similar to transient acantholytic dermatosis (Grover disease).
What are the clinical features of Darier disease?
The symptoms and signs of Darier disease vary markedly between individuals. Some have very subtle signs that are asymptomatic and found only on careful inspection. Others have extensive lesions which can cause considerable distress to the affected individual. In an affected person the severity of the disease can fluctuate over time.
The skin lesions are characterised by persistent, greasy, scaly papules. Affected sites include:
Seborrhoeic areas of the face (scalp margins, forehead, ears, around the nostrils and sides of nose, eyebrows, and beard area)
Central chest and back
Skin folds, such as armpits, groin, under the breasts, and between the buttocks
The papules have a firm, harsh feel like coarse sandpaper and may be skin-coloured, yellow-brown, or brown in colour. If several of the small papules grow together they may form larger warty lesions which can become quite smelly within skin folds. There may be a heavily crusted rash similar to seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Other skin signs may include:
Small pits on the palms and soles
Bleeding under the skin.
Atypical presentations of Darier disease are common.
Flat, freckle-like lesions
Large, raised, warty lesions
A linear pattern, with papules following the lines of embryonal development of the skin (segmental distribution)
Acne conglobata (cystic acne) is associated with Darier disease in some individuals.
Darier disease on the mid-back Scalp disease Facial cysts
Acrokeratosis verruciformis
Warty papules on the dorsum of hands are known as acrokeratosis verruciformis.
A localised variant of Darier disease, in which papules on hands and feet are the main feature is called acrokeratosis verruciformis of Hopf.
Nail signs of Darier disease
Most patients with Darier disease will have longitudinal broad red and/or white stripes in some or all fingernails. A V-shaped nick at the free edge of the nail is very suggestive of Darier disease.
Nail disease V-nick and red streaks in fingernails Palmar pits
Lesions affecting the mucous membranes
Mucous membranes are the red, moist linings of body surfaces (mouth, oesophagus, rectum, vulva, vagina). Patients with Darier disease may uncommonly have a white cobblestone pattern of small papules affecting the mucous membranes. Overgrowth of the gums may also occur.
Prognosis and complications of Darier disease
Most affected patients develop signs of Darier disease before the age of 20 years.
Many have mild and unnoticed Darier disease.
More severe disease may have a chronic relapsing-remitting pattern.
The signs may clear up altogether.
Flare-ups may be caused by any of the following factors.
Exposure to sunlight or heat.
Bacterial infection, usually Staphylococcus aureus
Herpes simplex infection – including severe Kaposi varicelliform eruption (see eczema herpeticum).
In most patients, general health remains good regardless of the severity of the disease. However it can have a major impact on psychosocial functioning and wellbeing (including depression and anxiety).
Kaposi varicelliform eruption in Darier disease
What is the treatment of Darier disease?
Treatment of Darier disease is required only if there are troublesome symptoms. Mild disease can be managed with:
Careful selection of clothing to avoid heat and minimise sweating
Localised Darier disease can be treated by:
Secondary bacterial infection (usually due to Staphylococcus aureus) should be treated with antibiotics. Herpes simplex is treated with aciclovir or valaciclovir.
Severe Darier disease is usually treated with oral retinoids, either acitretin or isotretinoin. Ciclosporin has been reported to be effective in a few patients. There are limited case reports regarding the benefit of dupilumab.
Darier disease before acitretin Darier disease after acitretin
Michelmore C, Hitchens E, Johnstone L, Keith D. Successful treatment of Darier disease with ablative fractional carbon dioxide laser. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2024;50(1):162-164. Journal
Schmieder SJ, Sathe NC, Rosario-Collazo JA. Darier Disease. Nih.gov. Published November 30, 2023. Available here
Darier disease pathology
Acrokeratosis of Hopf
Familial pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease)
Darier Disease Resource Site
Keratosis follicularis (Darier disease): from emedicine dermatology, the online textbook
Darier's Diseases — British Association of Dermatologists
Keratinization Disorders — geneSkin
OMIM – Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (search term Darier disease)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dermatitis]
Dermatitis: Types and treatments — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Dermatitis — extra information
703938007, 26435006, 34936997, 53107009, 414492009
Authors: Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, Burnley, Lancashire, UK. April 2022. Previous author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand, 1997. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnosis
Dermatitis refers to a group of itchy inflammatory conditions characterised by epidermal changes.
Dermatitis can be classified in a variety of ways. It may be classified by:
Clinical appearance eg, discoid dermatitis, hyperkeratotic dermatitis, and pompholyx
Site of predilection eg, hand dermatitis, eyelid dermatitis, or lower leg dermatitis.
The terms dermatitis and eczema are often used interchangeably. All eczema is a dermatitis, but not all dermatitis is eczema.
Dermatitis, strictly speaking, includes any cause of skin inflammation affecting the epidermis.
Eczema is derived from the Greek word for “to boil or bubble over”, which pathologically manifests as oedema within the epidermis (called spongiosis).
The term dermatitis is sometimes mistakenly attributed to mean an eczema induced by an occupational factor; this is erroneous.
Who gets dermatitis?
Different types of dermatitis are more frequent at different stages of life, for example:
Atopic dermatitis and pityriasis alba are more common in children
Hand eczema is more common in young and middle-aged adults
Venous or gravitational eczema, asteatotic dermatitis, and nummular eczema are more common in middle and older age groups.
There are no consistent racial factors influencing disease frequency.
What are the clinical features of dermatitis?
Dermatitis may be either acute or chronic, and although the mechanism by which the dermatitis develops may be the same, the appearances may be starkly different.
Acute dermatitis will show redness or swelling, papulation, vesiculation, oozing and weeping, and even blistering.
Chronic eczema will show skin thickening with accentuation of the skin creases, hyperkeratosis, scaling, fissuring, excoriation, and hyperpigmentation.
Subacute dermatitis will show features of both.
How do the clinical features vary in different racial groups?
Redness may be more difficult to appreciate in darker skin types.
Post-inflammatory hypo- and hyperpigmentation are more frequent in darker skin types.
What are the types of dermatitis?
Exogenous dermatitis is the result of an external factor or insult that induces skin inflammation. Common causes include:
Photosensitive dermatitis — triggered by light or UV radiation
Post-traumatic dermatitis — due to physical injuries such as abrasions, burns, or surgery (eg, autonomic denervation dermatitis)
Dermatitis induced by local skin infections such as bacterial, fungal, and viral e.g. molluscum contagiosum and HTLV-1 disease
Drug-induced dermatitis.
Endogenous dermatitis occurs because of often ill-understood internal factors. Common types include:
Atopic dermatitis — a common form of dermatitis occurring in children and adults, and often occurring in families with a background of asthma and hay fever
Seborrhoeic dermatitis — common chronic eczema affecting the face, scalp, ears and major flexures, due to a reaction to yeasts that colonise the skin
Discoid (nummular) dermatitis — coin-shaped patches of dermatitis usually affecting the limbs
Lichen simplex — chronic dermatitis that thickens due to perpetual scratching
Pityriasis alba — pale patches of dermatitis affecting the cheeks
Hand dermatitis — internal, external irritants and allergic factors may all play a part even in a single individual
Eyelid dermatitis — again, often of mixed cause
Otitis externa — dermatitis affecting the ear canal and the pinna
Venous or gravitational dermatitis — dermatitis due to malfunction of the lower leg vein valves
Juvenile plantar dermatitis — a glazed and fissured forefoot eczema occurring in children
Metabolic dermatitis — seen in some nutritional and endocrine disorders
Chronic superficial scaly dermatitis — finger-shaped patches of eczema occurring on the trunk
Asteatotic dermatitis — crazy-paving shaped dermatitis due to degreasing of the skin from excessive bathing and soap use on the legs in the elderly
Halo dermatitis or Meyerson naevus — this can surround a benign mole
Erythrodermic dermatitis — severe dermatitis when more than 80% of the skin is affected.
What is the differential diagnosis of dermatitis?
Bacterial infections — impetigo, erythrasma
Connective tissue diseases — lupus erythematosus and dermatomyositis
Blistering diseases — bullous pemphigoid
Skin tumours — Bowen disease, superficial basal cell carcinomas
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
How is dermatitis investigated?
A detailed history and examination may be all that is required to make an accurate diagnosis.
The following investigations may sometimes be needed:
Skin scraping to exclude a fungal infection mimicking a dermatitis
Skin swab looking for bacterial or viral superadded infection
Light testing if a photosensitive dermatitis is considered
Skin biopsy to exclude mimics of dermatitis
Blood tests — IgE (usually elevated in atopic dermatitis), thyroid function (in some hand dermatitis and asteatotic dermatitis).
How is dermatitis treated?
General principles are covered here. Specific management of specific types of dermatitis are detailed on the relevant pages.
Potential allergen identification and avoidance — made on the basis of history e.g. hobbies, products used, and occupation. A patch test will confirm.
Potential irritant identification and avoidance — avoid soaps, shower gels, dust, organic solvents, and drying/desiccating agents.
Protect the skin with personal protective equipment — especially hand dermatitis, by the use of cotton gloves for dry work, and cotton with an occlusive glove appropriate to the suspected allergen or irritant.
Emollients — both in place of soap, after bathing or washing, and at any time if the skin feels dry.
Potassium permanganate soaks — useful for drying up weepy exudative or blistering acute eczema.
Paste bandages — useful to help topical steroids penetrate the skin, soothe, and reduce skin trauma from scratching.
Topical steroids — generally use an ointment if the skin is dry, and a cream if it is wet and weepy.
Most work just as well if applied only once daily.
Help reduce skin inflammation that causes the eczema, and should be applied where the skin is inflamed (red and itchy).
Potent products are often used for 7–14 days, then the frequency of application is reduced to alternate days, then twice weekly, and the potency of the steroid reduced.
Twice weekly steroid treatment is often recommended to prevent disease relapse, and prevent flare-ups for extended periods.
Topical anti-inflammatory agents
Calcineurin inhibitors such as pimecrolimus and tacrolimus suppress eczema and do not have the long-term side effects of potent steroids, particularly for the face.
Newer small molecules such as JAK inhibitors (ruxolitinib) are either approved or being developed for the treatment of dermatitis.
Ultraviolet B and Psoralens UVA (PUVA) may be valuable for recalcitrant atopic and discoid dermatitis.
Antihistamines — to suppress the itch of eczema, a sedating antihistamine, rather than a non-sedating agent is generally needed.
Antibiotics and antivirals — should be considered if the eczema is super-infected with bacteria (Staphylococcus) and herpes simplex.
Immunosuppressive therapies — less than 2% of chronic eczema sufferers will fail to be adequately controlled with the above therapies. Agents that reduce the overactive immune response seen in dermatitis may help. Methotrexate, azathioprine, and ciclosporin are the agents usually considered.
Biological therapies — antibody treatments that specifically block the key mediators of inflammation in dermatitis (cytokines) are in use and in active development for severe dermatitis. These injection treatments include dupilumab, tralokinumab, lebrikizumab, and nemolizumab.
Oral small molecules — baricitinib, upadacitinib, and abrocitanib either are licensed or are being considered for licence and use in moderate/severe atopic dermatitis in many countries. These agents block the JAK/STAT pathways that in turn regulate cytokine production.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Incontinence associated dermatitis
Chronic superficial scaly dermatitis
Juvenile plantar dermatitis
Autonomic denervation dermatitis
Blistering skin condition
Potassium permanganate
Eczema — Medline Plus
Allergy New Zealand: local support group
Eczema Association of New Zealand
National Eczema Association for Science and Education: an American patient support organisation
Eczema/skin reactions — AHA! Swiss Allergy Centre
Eczema — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dermatitis Herpetiformis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dermatitis-herpetiformis]
Dermatitis Herpetiformis: Features, Diagnosis, and Treatment - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Dermatitis herpetiformis — extra information
Duhring Brocq disease, Duhring disease
Systemic diseases, Rashes
111196000, 402444004, 437651000124104
Dermatitis herpetiformis
March 2023 Authors: Dr Ahmed Al-Tameemi, University Hospital of Morcambe Bay, NHS Foundation Trust; Dr Sarah Elyoussfi, Dermatology Registrar, Salford Royal Hospital NHS Trust; and Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, East Lancashire NHS Trust, United Kingdom (2023)Previous contributors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2001); Dr Shendy Engelina (2016) Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is dermatitis herpetiformis?
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an inflammatory immunobullous disease of the skin and a cutaneous manifestation of coeliac (celiac) disease, a gluten-sensitive enteropathy.
The name herpetiformis is derived from the tendency for blisters to appear in clusters, resembling herpes simplex. However, DH is not due to viral infection.
DH is also known as Duhring-Brocq disease.
Clustered vesicles have been excoriated on the elbows in dermatitis herpetiformis Elbow, sacral and buttock lesions - the classical distribution of dermatitis herpetiformis Excoriated vesicles on the buttocks and sacrum in dermatitis herpetiformis (DH-patient 1)Dermatitis herpetiformis Hairline lesions in dermatitis herpetiformis Dermatitis herpetiformis
Who gets dermatitis herpetiformis?
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) has a prevalence of 10 per 100,000 population.
DH predominantly affects Caucasians aged 15–50 years, but may occur in other ages and ethnicities.
It is rare in those of African and Asian ancestry, and most common in Irish and Swedish people.
Mean age at diagnosis is 40–50 years.
There is a male predominance of 2:1.
More females <20 years are affected than males; males tend to present at a later age.
There is a genetic predisposition with an association with human leukocyte antigens (HLA) DQ2 and DQ8. ~90% of patients with coeliac disease carry HLA-DQ2, leaving only a small proportion of patients with lower risk heterodimers (such as HLA-DQ8). 10–15% of individuals with DH have an affected first degree relative.
Some patients have a personal or family history of other autoimmune diseases including thyroid disease, pernicious anaemia, type 1 diabetes, vitiligo, Addison disease, alopecia areata, and haemochromatosis.
What causes dermatitis herpetiformis?
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) and coeliac disease are due to intolerance to the gliadin fraction of gluten found in wheat, rye, and barley.
Gluten triggers production of IgA antibodies and an autoimmune process that targets the skin and gut.
In coeliac disease, gluten causes intestinal inflammation resulting in diarrhoea, tiredness, weight loss, abdominal discomfort, and metabolic consequences of malabsorption.
The majority (>90%) of patients with DH also have gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Gastrointestinal symptoms are usually mild; some patients remain symptom-free.
Around 15–25% of coeliac patients have concurrent DH. These patients tend to have a more severe intestinal pathology in comparison to those without DH.
What are the clinical features of dermatitis herpetiformis?
DH presents as intense itch and a symmetrical blistering rash. Vesicles (often 3–5 mm in diameter) or blisters develop on erythematous skin but are often eroded and crusted due to scratching.
Distribution is a helpful diagnostic clue; lesions most commonly appear on the scalp, shoulders, buttocks, elbows, and knees.
It is characterised by prurigo (extremely itchy papules) and vesicles on normal or reddened skin.
DH may also present initially as digital petechiae.
Flat red patches, thickened plaques, and weals may occur resembling other inflammatory skin conditions such as dermatitis, scabies, and papular urticaria.
Lesions resolve to leave postinflammatory hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation.
DH may be exacerbated by some medications (eg, potassium iodide, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, leuprolide acetate, progesterone), and premenstrually.
How does dermatitis herpetiformis differ in skin of colour?
While uncommon, clinical features are similar, although postinflammatory pigmentation is more prominent.
What are the complications of dermatitis herpetiformis and coeliac disease?
The following conditions may affect patients with dermatitis herpetiformis (DH), especially when it is associated with coeliac disease:
Aphthous ulcers and angular cheilitis
Dry skin, nail, and hair abnormalities
Dental problems: thin enamel
Neurological problems: ataxia (loss of balance), polyneuropathy, epilepsy
Heart problems: pericarditis and cardiomyopathy
Recurrent miscarriages
Fatty liver resulting in abnormal liver function tests
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)* affecting the intestines or any part of the body.
*The risk of NHL is increased six to tenfold among DH patients. Strict adherence to a gluten-free diet reduces this rare but serious complication. Fortunately, increased lymphoma risk is evident only during the first 5 years after DH diagnosis and gluten-free diet adherence.
How is dermatitis herpetiformis diagnosed?
Skin biopsy is usually necessary to confirm DH.
Lesional skin may show:
Subepidermal blisters
Neutrophil and eosinophil inflammatory cells in the dermal papillae.
Uninvolved perilesional skin contains a significantly greater number of IgA deposits, and lesional biopsies in general have a higher false negative rate.
DH is characterised by granular deposits of IgA at the dermoepidermal junction papillae.
Perilesional skin biopsy using direct immunofluorescence is the gold standard test for diagnosis of DH (90–95% sensitivity; 95–100% specificity).
Granular deposits of IgA shown on direct immunofluorescence of perilesional skin (courtesy of Dr Richard Groves, London)
See Dermatitis herpetiformis pathology for more information.
Screen for nutritional deficiencies
Patients with DH are commonly offered the same blood tests used for patients with coeliac disease to screen for nutritional deficiencies. These include:
Full blood count, liver function tests, and serum calcium
Iron, ferritin, zinc, vitamin B12, and folate
Thyroid function tests.
Mild anaemia may be caused by iron or folic acid deficiency (or both) due to malabsorption associated with gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Thyroid function tests are usually recommended due to the association between DH and thyroid disease.
Diagnostic blood tests
Specific autoantibody tests for DH are:
IgA anti-endomysial antibodies (present in 80% of patients with DH)
IgA tissue transglutaminase antibody (tTG)
IgA epidermal transglutaminase antibodies (eTG), when available
DH is associated with IgA eTG, which is not the case in coeliac disease
IgA and IgG deamidated gliadin peptide antibody (dGP)
IgA and IgG gliadin assay
Borderline results may be difficult to interpret.
Small intestinal biopsy
DH patients with abnormal blood results usually proceed to have a small intestinal biopsy to confirm gluten-sensitive enteropathy. This is histologically characterised by small bowel villous atrophy. This means that instead of being highly convoluted, the lining of the intestines is smooth and flattened.
The small bowel may appear normal because of treatment (gluten-free diet and/or medication), skip lesions (the sample was taken from an unaffected site), or the intestine may be unaffected by the disease.
HLA haplotype testing (for a set of DNA variations) may reveal HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8. This is present in almost all patients with DH (and coeliac disease).
What is the differential diagnosis of dermatitis herpetiformis?
Linear IgA bullous disease
Atopic dermatitis/eczema
Prurigo nodularis/nodular prurigo
What is the treatment for dermatitis herpetiformis?
A gluten-free diet for life is strongly recommended in patients with DH, as it:
Reduces the requirement for medication to control DH
Improves associated gluten-sensitive enteropathy
Enhances nutrition and bone density
May reduce the risk of developing other autoimmune conditions
May reduce the risk of intestinal lymphoma.
It may take up to 2 years for a gluten-free diet to reach its maximal effect.
Dapsone is the treatment of choice for DH, as it usually reduces itch within 3 days.
Dose ranges from 25–300 mg daily.
It may be gradually weaned off in those who have been on a stable gluten-free diet.
The effects of dapsone are seen rapidly. Symptoms of itch resolve within several hours and new blister formation ceases in 24–36 hours. It is an effective option in the early stages of gluten-free diet initiation.
Dapsone has no effect on enteropathy, deposition of IgA antibodies, or lymphoma risk.
Dapsone has potential side effects and monitoring requirements.
Agranulocytosis (occurring 3–12 weeks after initiation), dapsone hypersensitivity (usually 4–6 weeks after initiating treatment), and methaemaglobinopathy are rare but serious complications. Dapsone must be stopped immediately in these scenarios.
If intolerant or allergic to dapsone, the following may be useful:
Ultra-potent topical steroids
There are reports that combination therapy with dapsone and sulfasalazine may be effective in patients who do not tolerate increasing doses of dapsone monotherapy.
Topical dapsone 5% gel was also shown to be effective as an adjuvant treatment for DH. Compared to oral dapsone, topical dapsone was associated with a lower incidence of side effects and can be administered safely in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
What is the outcome for dermatitis herpetiformis?
Dermatitis herpetiformis usually has a good prognosis, with the majority of patients responding well to a strict gluten-free diet and medication. A lifelong gluten-free diet is required. Although the overall incidence of T cell lymphoma is increased in DH, the overall disease mortality is lower than the general population, possibly due to a reduction in cardiovascular disease and obesity.
Bevans SL, Sami N. Dapsone and sulfasalazine combination therapy in dermatitis herpetiformis. Int J Dermatol. 2017;56(5):e90–2. doi: 10.1111/ijd.13542. Journal
Bolotin D, Petronic-Rosic V. Dermatitis herpetiformis: part II. Diagnosis, management, and prognosis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(6):1027–33. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.09.776. Journal
Caproni M, Antiga E, Melani L, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of dermatitis herpetiformis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009;23(6):633–8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2009.03188.x. Journal
Dominguez Castro P, Harkin G, Hussey M, et al. Changes in presentation of celiac disease in Ireland from the 1960s to 2015. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;15(6):864–71.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2016.11.018. Journal
Lewis HM, Renuala TL, Garioch JJ, et al. Protective effect of gluten-free diet against development of lymphoma in dermatitis herpetiformis. Br J Dermatol. 1996;135(3):363–7. Journal
Reunala T, Hervonen K, Salmi T. Dermatitis Herpetiformis: An Update on Diagnosis and Management. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2021;22(3):329–338. doi: 10.1007/s40257-020-00584-2. Journal
Salmi T, Hervonen K. Current Concepts of Dermatitis Herpetiformis. Acta Derm Venereol. 2020;100(5):adv00056. doi: 10.2340/00015555-3401. Journal
Salmi TT, Hervonen K, Kautiainen H, et al. Prevalence and incidence of dermatitis herpetiformis: a 40-year prospective study from Finland. Br J Dermatol. 2011;165(2):354–9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10385.x. Journal
Vale ECSD, Dimatos OC, Porro AM, Santi CG. Consensus on the treatment of autoimmune bullous dermatoses: Dermatitis herpetiformis and linear IgA bullous dermatosis — Brazilian Society of Dermatology. An Bras Dermatol. 2019;94(2 Suppl 1):48–55. doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.2019940208. PubMed
Gluten enteropathy in patients with dermatitis herpetiformis
Autoimmune diseases in dermatology
Direct immunofluorescence
Dermatitis herpetiformis pathology
Skin signs of gastrointestinal disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis — British Association of Dermatologists
Gluten-free diet — Coeliac UK
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dermographism]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dermographism]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Dermographism — extra information
Dermatographism, Dermatographia, Dermatographic urticaria, Ebbecke reaction, Dermography, Autographism
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997; Updated: Elena Redl, Medical Student, University of Vienna, Austria; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist, Christchurch, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. May 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is dermographism?
Dermographism is an exaggerated weal and flare response that occurs within minutes of the skin being stroked or scratched. Dermographism is the most common form of physical or chronic inducible urticaria. It is also called dermatographia and dermographic urticaria.
Who gets dermographism?
Dermographism can appear at any age, including children, but onset is most common in young adults. There does not appear to be any racial predilection or differences between the sexes. Some studies have reported a positive family history (OMIM 125635).
Most people with dermographism are otherwise healthy. Dermographism can be seen in association with scabies and some medications.
The incidence of true dermographism does not appear to be increased in association with atopy, although this is still debated in the literature.
What causes dermographism?
The exact mechanism of dermographism is not known. Skin trauma may release an (as yet unidentified) antigen that reacts with the membrane-bound IgE on mast cells triggering release of histamine and other inflammatory mediators. Histamine causes local vasodilation and leaking of fluid from small blood vessels which leads to fluid accumulation in the skin. Support for this theory is that dermographism can be passively transferred to others.
What are the clinical features of dermographism?
Immediate dermographism
Immediate dermographism presents with linear weals and a surrounding red flare which appears 1–3 minutes after stroking and resolves in 30–60 minutes. It can be classified as:
Simple dermographism (skin writing)
Probably an exaggerated physiological response to moderate/firm or repeated stroking or rubbing
Symptomatic dermographism (factitious urticaria)
Worse in the evening or at night
Follows gentle stroking or light pressure from clothing
Can have a significant impact on quality of life, particularly due to sleep disturbance and fatigue.
Although dermographism is typically described involving the skin, it can also affect mucous membranes such as the oral mucosa/lips and vulva.
Other forms of true dermographism
Response to rubbing rather than scratching
Reported in 3% of the general population with a middle-aged female predominance
Delayed dermographism
By definition, dermographism appearing at least 30 minutes after stroking. It may be described after a typical weal of immediate dermographism comes and goes, 3–6 hours later a wide weal reappears without a flare at the same site and persists for up to 48 hours
Associated with burning and tenderness of the weal
Cholinergic dermographism (beaded dermographism)
Related to an increased core temperature often in association with cholinergic urticaria
Linear broad erythematous flare and 1–2mm weals following stroking.
Non-urticarial forms of dermographism
White line (without a weal) following the scratch can be seen in atopic dermatitis or other forms of dermatitis.
Black or green line (without a weal) related to pressure and staining from a metal object.
How is dermographism diagnosed?
A skin biopsy is rarely required except occasionally to distinguish dermographism from mastocytosis. Histology of dermographism is nonspecific with oedema of the dermis with perivascular mononuclear cells.
What is the differential diagnosis for dermographism?
Mastocytosis: Darier sign of urticaria pigmentosa and other cutaneous mastocytoses.
Pressure urticaria Symptomatic dermographism Cutaneous mastocytosis
What is the treatment for dermographism?
Loose fitting clothing
Avoid triggers, such as very hot water or vigorous towel rubbing
Treat associated causes if identified, such as scabies
Psychological counselling, anxiolytics, antidepressants.
Second generation, non-sedating H1-antihistamines such as cetirizine or loratadine, which may be required in high dose and long-term
Delayed dermographism appears to be treatment-resistant.
What is the outcome for dermographism?
Dermographism can last for months or years, with idiopathic symptomatic dermographism typically persisting on average for 6 years. Red dermographism can improve within 6 months. Dermographism associated with a recognised trigger such as scabies lasts only days to weeks. Spontaneous resolution is common.
Golberg O, Johnston GA, Wilkinson M. Symptomatic dermographism mimicking latex allergy. Dermatitis. 2014;25(2):101–3. doi:10.1097/DER.0000000000000016. PubMed
Jedele KB, Michels VV. Familial dermographism. Am J Med Genet. 1991;39(2):201–3. doi:10.1002/ajmg.1320390216. PubMed
Kulthanan K, Ungprasert P, Tuchinda P, et al. Symptomatic dermographism: a systematic review of treatment options. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(9):3141–61. doi:10.1016/j.jaip.2020.05.016. PubMed
Schoepke N, Młynek A, Weller K, Church MK, Maurer M. Symptomatic dermographism: an inadequately described disease. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(4):708–12. doi:10.1111/jdv.12661. PubMed
Taşkapan O, Harmanyeri Y. Evaluation of patients with symptomatic dermographism. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2006;20(1):58–62. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3083.2005.01372.x. PubMed
Wong RC, Fairley JA, Ellis CN. Dermographism: a review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1984;11(4 Pt 1):643–52. doi:10.1016/s0190-9622(84)70222-2. PubMed
Chronic inducible urticaria
Delayed pressure urticaria
Urticaria – an overview
Urticaria in children
Laube S. Dermographism urticaria. Medscape. June 2018. Available at:
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Digital Myxoid Pseudocyst]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/digital-myxoid-pseudocyst]
Digital mucous (myxoid) cyst
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Digital myxoid pseudocyst
Digital myxoid pseudocyst — extra information
Myxoid cyst, Mucous cyst, Digital ganglion cyst, Digital synovial cyst., Digital myxoid cyst, Digital mucous cyst
Digital myxoid pseudocyst
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Updated by Dr Oakley, May 2016.
What is a digital myxoid pseudocyst?
A digital myxoid pseudocyst is a shiny papule found at the end of a finger or toe, close to the nail. It is called a pseudocyst because it is not surrounded by a capsule, unlike a true cyst. It is also called a myxoid cyst, a mucous cyst, a digital ganglion cyst, and a digital synovial cyst.
What causes a digital myxoid pseudocyst?
The cyst arises from degeneration in the connective tissue on the top of the last segment of the finger.
There appear to be two variations. The first is a form of focal mucinosis, a condition characterised by abnormal deposits of mucopolysaccharides (mucins) in the skin. The other variation arises from extension of the lining of the finger joint and is due to osteoarthritis – a type of ganglion. See pathology of a digital myxoid pseudocyst.
What are the clinical features of a digital myxoid pseudocyst?
The digital pseudocyst is semi-translucent, with a smooth shiny surface. It is most often located within a centimetre of the base of the nail. It often causes a groove in the nail. This may be up to several millimetres across and extends the length of the nail.
Jelly-like sticky fluid may be expressed from the pseudocyst (sometimes tinged with blood).
Myxoid cyst Myxoid cyst Myxoid cyst Myxoid cyst Myxoid cyst Myxoid cyst
What is the treatment for digital myxoid pseudocyst?
Treatments which may be successful for digital myxoid pseudocyst include:
Repeatedly pressing firmly on the cyst
Squeezing out its contents (make a hole with a sterile needle)
Cryotherapy (freezing)
Sclerosant injection
Unfortunately, digital myxoid pseudocysts often recur, whatever treatment is used.
Myxoid cyst Needling a myxoid cyst Needling a myxoid cyst
Digital myxoid pseudocyst pathology
Cutaneous cysts and pseudocysts
Digital mucous cyst — Medscape Reference
Digital Myxoid Cyst — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Discoid Eczema]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/discoid-eczema]
Discoid eczema. Discoid eczema
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Discoid eczema — extra information
Nummular dermatitis, Discoid dermatitis, Nummular eczema, Nummular eczematous dermatitis
81418003, 402213006, 402214000, 402215004, 238543002
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated July 2014. Revised September 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is discoid eczema?
Discoid eczema is a common type of eczema/dermatitis defined by scattered, well-defined, coin-shaped and coin-sized plaques of eczema. Discoid eczema is also called nummular dermatitis.
Discoid eczema day 2 Discoid eczema day 6 Discoid eczema day 14
What is the cause of discoid eczema?
The eruption can be precipitated by:
A localised injury such as scratch, insect bite or thermal burn
Impetigo or wound infection
Varicose veins (varicose eczema)
Who gets discoid eczema?
Discoid eczema can affect all age groups. It is slightly more common in older adult males and younger adult females. In males there is an association with chronic alcoholism. Drug-induced discoid eczema can be due to medications that cause skin dryness.
Discoid eczema can occur in association with atopic eczema, eczema craquelé, and secondary eczematisation.
What are the clinical features of discoid eczema?
Discoid eczema usually affects the limbs, particularly the legs, but the rash may be widespread. Although often bilateral, the distribution can be asymmetrical especially if related to varicose veins.
There are two clinical forms of discoid eczema:
Exudative acute discoid eczema: oozy papules, blisters, and plaques
Dry discoid eczema: subacute or chronic erythematous, dry plaques
Individual plaques are well circumscribed, mostly 1–3 cm in diameter, and inflamed. The majority of patches are round or oval. The plaques are usually very itchy. The skin between the patches is usually dry and irritable.
Severe discoid eczema may generalise, with numerous small to large itchy plaques appearing all over the body due to an autoeczematisation reaction.
Patches may clear up without leaving a sign. In dark skin, marks may persist for months as dark brown postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or pale postinflammatory hypopigmentation.
Exudative discoid eczema
Discoid eczema Discoid eczema Discoid eczema Infected nummular atopic dermatitis
How is discoid eczema diagnosed?
Bacterial swabs may reveal Staphylococcus aureus colonisation or infection.
Scrapings are commonly taken for mycology, as discoid eczema can look very similar to tinea corporis (ringworm infection).
What is the differential diagnosis of discoid eczema?
Discoid eczema may resemble other annular skin eruptions including tinea corporis, plaque psoriasis, and pityriasis rosea.
What is the treatment of discoid eczema?
As discoid eczema is associated with loss of skin barrier function, it is important to:
Protect the skin from injury.
This type of dermatitis often starts after minor skin injuries, so careful skin protection is required. If the hands are affected, use gloves and tools to make sure the skin is not irritated by friction, detergents, solvents, other chemicals, or excessive water.
Apply emollients frequently
Emollients include bath oils, soap substitutes and moisturising creams. They can be applied to dermatitis as frequently as required to relieve itching, scaling, and dryness. Emollients should also be used on the unaffected skin to reduce dryness. It may be necessary to try several different products to find one that suits. Many people find one or more of the following helpful: glycerine and cetomacrogol cream, white soft paraffin/liquid paraffin mixed, fatty cream, wool fat lotions, or urea cream.
Anti-inflammatory treatments include:
Topical steroids are anti-inflammatory creams or ointments available on prescription to apply just to the patches once or twice daily for 2–4 weeks. They may also be available as steroid impregnated tape. Topical steroids reduce symptoms and clear the dermatitis.
Antibiotics (eg, erythromycin, flucloxacillin) are often prescribed if the dermatitis is blistered, sticky, or crusted. Sometimes discoid eczema clears completely on oral antibiotics, only to recur when they are discontinued.
Other treatments sometimes prescribed for severe discoid eczema include:
Antihistamine pills may reduce the itch in some patients with discoid eczema. They do not clear the rash.
Ultraviolet radiation (UV) treatment
Phototherapy several times weekly for 6–12 weeks for generalised or widespread discoid eczema can reduce itch and improve the rash.
Intralesional steroids are sometimes injected into one or two particularly stubborn areas of discoid eczema. This treatment is unsuitable for multiple lesions.
Other oral treatments
Persistent and troublesome discoid eczema is occasionally treated with methotrexate, azathioprine or ciclosporin. These medicines require careful monitoring by a specialist dermatologist. They may be more suitable than long-term systemic steroids.
What is the outcome of discoid eczema?
Leung AKC, Lam JM, Leong KF, Leung AAM, Wong AHC, Hon KL. Nummular eczema: an updated review [published online ahead of print, 2020 Aug 10]. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2020;10.2174/1872213X14666200810152246. doi:10.2174/1872213X14666200810152246. PubMed
Roberts H, Orchard D. Methotrexate is a safe and effective treatment for paediatric discoid (nummular) eczema: a case series of 25 children. Australas J Dermatol. 2010;51(2):128–30. doi:10.1111/j.1440-0960.2010.00634.x. PubMed
Trayes KP, Savage K, Studdiford JS. Annular lesions: diagnosis and treatment. Am Fam Physician. 2018;98(5):283–91. PubMed
Bruno MC, Vilela MA, Oliveira CA. Study on dermatoses and their prevalence in groups of confirmed alcoholic individuals in comparison to a non-alcoholic group of individuals. An Bras Dermatol. 2013;88(3):368–75. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20131829. PubMed
Ingram JR. Eczematous disorders. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell 2016:39.7–9.
Emollients for eczema
Dermatitis online course for health professionals
Blistering skin conditions
Drug-induced nummular dermatitis
Discoid eczema — Medscape Reference
Discoid eczema — British Association of Dermatologists
Nummular dermatitis — American Academy of Dermatology
Steroid impregnated tape — YouTube: demonstrating tape application
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Discoid Lupus Erythematosus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/discoid-lupus-erythematosus]
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus — extra information
Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus, DLE
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Last Reviewed: May, 2022
Zena Alani, Doctor and Clinical Researcher, New Zealand, 2022;
Dr Paul Jarrett, Dermatologist, Auckland, New Zealand, 2022.
Previous contributor:
Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, 2015.
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is discoid lupus erythematosus?
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a chronic scarring skin condition. It is the most common form of cutaneous lupus.
DLE is a sub-type of chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus. It is characterised by persistent scaly plaques on the scalp, face, and ears which subsequently can progress to scarring, atrophy, dyspigmentation, and permanent hair loss in affected hair-bearing areas.
Who gets discoid lupus erythematosus?
DLE can affect males and females of any age but occurs more frequently in women in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. Children are rarely affected. The estimated prevalence is around 20–40 people in every 100,000.
DLE is more common in skin of colour. For example, in New Zealand, Māori, and Pacific people have a significantly higher relative risk of discoid lupus erythematosus compared to the European population. This ethnic disparity has also been observed in the USA with those with skin of colour having an increased incidence of DLE.
What causes discoid lupus erythematosus?
The causes of DLE are endogenous and exogenous.
Endogenous factors include:
Genetic predisposition with major histocompatibility complex alleles HLA-DQA1 and DRB1.
Single nucleotide polymorphism TYK2, IRF5, CTLA4 are also associated.
Interferon, particularly type 1, is a key cytokine in pathogenesis.
IRF5 and TYK2 are involved in interferon regulation.
ITGAM polymorphisms confer a greater risk for DLE than systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Exogenous factors include:
Smoking which is more common in those with DLE and which also impairs the efficacy of antimalarials
Ultraviolet radiation can provoke DLE as it is a photosensitive disorder. However, it can be found in non-sun exposed areas.
What are the clinical features of discoid lupus erythematosus?
DLE may be localised (above the neck in 80%) or generalised (above and below the neck in 20%). Often the rash is asymptomatic but it can be itchy and sore. Most patients with DLE only have skin involvement but some have or subsequently develop signs of SLE. Typically, the lesions evolve over time.
Typical signs of localised DLE include:
Initial dry red patches evolve to form red plaques with adherent scale. Follicular hyperkeratosis (plugs of keratin within hair follicles) is common. When this scale is removed using sticky tape the horny plugs can be seen giving rise to the “carpet-tack” sign.
As DLE progresses atrophic scarring and scarring alopecia is common. This is associated with hyper- and or hypo- pigmentary change and is especially noticeable in those with skin of colour.
DLE is typically located on the nose, cheeks, ear lobes, and conchal bowl (Shuster sign). It may involve lips, oral mucosa, nose, or eyelids.
Signs of generalised DLE include:
The morphology of the lesions is similar to that on the face and scalp but they are distributed widely including the anterior chest, upper back, dorsum of hands and less commonly on the lower limbs, palms, and soles. Rarely, there is involvement of the anogenital mucosa.
Conchal bowl discoid lupus erythematosus (Shuster sign) (DLE-patient4)Active inflammatory discoid lupus erythematosus with hypopigmented scarred areas on the cheek (DLE-patient8)Well circumscribed scarred ear lobe due to discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE-patient8)Scarring alopecia due to discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE-patient4) erythematosus Discoid lupus erythematosus Scarring alopecia with follicular plugging in discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE-patient4)
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
DLE is more common in skin of colour. Hypo- and hyper-pigmentary change in those with skin of colour is especially noticeable and distressing.
What are the complications of discoid lupus erythematosus?
Discoid lupus erythematosus can have an impact physically and psychologically affecting the patient’s quality of life.
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) measures matched with Cutaneous Lupus Disease Area and Severity Index (CLASI) measures have shown that quality of life in patients with DLE is poor.
DLE commonly scars causing facial disfigurement and permanent alopecia. Pigmentary change may improve over long periods.
There is a link between DLE and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Approximately 5% of patients with localised and 15% with generalised DLE develop SLE.
How is discoid lupus erythematosus diagnosed?
Discoid lupus erythematosus is diagnosed from its distribution and the clinical appearance of the plaques. A patient with DLE should undergo a complete examination for other manifestations of lupus.
A skin biopsy usually confirms diagnosis.
Features vary depending on the stage of the DLE but include an interface dermatitis also involving hair follicles and a perivascular and peri-appendageal lymphocytic infiltrate in the upper and lower dermis.
There is epidermal vacuolation and apoptotic basal cells and hyperkeratosis.
The basement membrane may become thickened and dermal mucin may be present.
As lesions evolve further, the inflammatory infiltrate subsides and there is dermal fibrosis.
Blood tests include a full blood count, renal function, and antinuclear antibodies (ANA). ANA is frequently not detected.
What is the differential diagnosis for discoid lupus erythematosus?
Polymorphous light eruption (PMLE)
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Squamous cell carcinoma
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
Facial discoid dermatosis
What is the treatment for discoid lupus erythematosus?
Careful year-round protection from sun exposure using clothing and generously applied high SPF broad-spectrum sunscreens. Sunscreens alone are not adequate.
While indoors, some patients may also need to stay away from glass windows, or these can be treated with UV-blocking films.
Vitamin D supplements should be recommended for those who strictly avoid the sun.
Intermittent courses of potent or ultrapotent topical corticosteroids applied for several weeks are the first treatment for localised DLE. Intralesional injections of corticosteroids are sometimes used.
Calcineurin inhibitors — tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus cream can also be used.
Cosmetic camouflage and wigs are useful and improves self-confidence when there is extensive scarring.
Systemic corticosteroids such as prednisone or prednisolone can be used for short term control.
The following have been used and sometimes in combinations; hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, mepacrine, clofazimine, methotrexate, oral retinoids (isotretinoin and acitretin), mycophenolate mofetil, ciclosporin, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, dapsone, thalidomide, intravenous immunoglobulins, and biologic agents (belimumab and rituximab).
What is the outcome for discoid lupus erythematosus?
Despite the multiple therapeutic options, treatment can be difficult.
Discoid lupus erythematosus is a chronic condition which can last for many years.
Squamous cell carcinoma can rarely arise within a longstanding DLE plaque in the skin or mucous membrane.
Achtman JC, Werth VP. Pathophysiology of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015;17(1):182. Published 2015 Aug 10. doi:10.1186/s13075-015-0706-2. Journal
Albrecht J, Taylor L, Berlin JA, et al. The CLASI (Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index): an outcome instrument for cutaneous lupus erythematosus. J Invest Dermatol. 2005;125(5):889–94. doi:10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23889.x. Journal
Chen P, Broadbent E, Coomarasamy C, Jarrett P. Illness perception in association with psychological functioning in patients with discoid lupus erythematosus. Br J Dermatol. 2015;173(3):824–6. doi:10.1111/bjd.13709. Journal
Chong BF, Song J, Olsen NJ. Determining risk factors for developing systemic lupus erythematosus in patients with discoid lupus erythematosus. Br J Dermatol. 2012;166(1):29–35. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10610.x. Journal
Drenkard C, Parker S, Aspey LD, et al. Racial Disparities in the Incidence of Primary Chronic Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus in the Southeastern US: The Georgia Lupus Registry. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019;71(1):95–103. doi:10.1002/acr.23578. Journal
Gordon H, Chandran A, Vandal AC, Yung A, Jarrett P. The relationship between disease severity and quality of life in discoid lupus erythematosus. Br J Dermatol. 2017;177(4):1134–5. doi:10.1111/bjd.15227. Journal
Jarrett P, Thornley S, Scragg R. Ethnic differences in the epidemiology of cutaneous lupus erythematosus in New Zealand. Lupus. 2016;25(13):1497–1502. doi:10.1177/0961203316651745. Journal
Jessop S, Whitelaw DA, Grainge MJ, Jayasekera P. Drugs for discoid lupus erythematosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;5(5):CD002954. Published 2017 May 5. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002954.pub3. Journal
O'Kane D, McCourt C, Meggitt S, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of people with cutaneous lupus erythematosus 2021. Br J Dermatol. 2021;185(6):1112–23. doi:10.1111/bjd.20597. Journal
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Pathology of discoid lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Chilblain lupus erythematosus
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus
Connective tissue diseases – course for health professionals
Diagnosis of scalp rashes
Psychological effects of cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Antimalarial medications in dermatology
Discoid lupus erythematosus case 1
Discoid lupus erythematosus case 2
Lupus Foundation of America
Lupus Support Group (New Zealand)
Irish Lupus support group
Steroid impregnated tape — YouTube: demonstrating tape application
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Drug Hypersensitivity Syndrome]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/drug-hypersensitivity-syndrome]
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome. DRESS
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome — extra information
Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, DRESS, Drug induced hypersensitivity syndrome, DIHS, DRESS syndrome
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome
Author: Assoc. Prof. Marius Rademaker, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2004. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, January 2016.
What is drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome is a specific, severe, unexpected reaction to a medicine, which affects several organ systems at the same time. It typically causes a combination of:
Morbilliform eruption
Haematological abnormalities
Inflammation of one or more internal organs.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome is sometimes also called drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS).
The syndrome is classified as a severe cutaneous adverse reaction (SCAR). It may have overlapping features with Stevens–Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) and acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP).
Who gets drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome is relatively rare. It mainly affects adults and is equal in incidence in males and females. Genetic susceptibility and HLA associations have been found for several causative drugs.
The most common drugs to cause this reaction are a number of anticonvulsant drugs (particularly carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and phenytoin), the anti-gout drug, allopurinol, olanzapine, and the sulphonamide group of antibiotics. It has been estimated that at least 1 in every 10,000 patients treated with an anticonvulsant will develop drug hypersensitivity syndrome.
The risk of drug hypersensitivity syndrome in patients on allopurinol depends on the dose of allopurinol, associated kidney disease, and concomitant thiazide diuretics.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome occurring within 2 weeks of starting the responsible drug is most likely with beta-lactam antibiotics or iodinated contrast media. Onset is delayed more than 2 weeks with anticonvulsants and allopurinol.
What causes drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome is a delayed T cell-mediated reaction. Tissue damage is due to cytotoxic T cells and cytokine release.
There is a genetic predisposition to drug hypersensitivity syndrome.
A defect in the way the liver metabolises drugs may be responsible.
Re-activation of human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6, the cause of roseola) or Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) may also be important.
What are the clinical features of drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome usually develops over several days, with onset 2-8 weeks after starting the responsible medicine.
A high fever of 38–40 C is usually noticed first. This is quickly followed by a widespread skin rash. Characteristics of the rash are diverse.
Facial swelling affects 30%
Mucosal involvement affects 25% (lips, mouth, throat, genitalia)
The rash can last many weeks.
Drug eruption Drug eruption Drug eruption
Systemic involvement in drug hypersensitivity syndrome
Symptoms may worsen after stopping the drug and may continue for weeks, or even months, despite drug withdrawal. The severity of the rash does not necessarily correlate with the extent of internal organ involvement. Later symptoms depend on the internal organs affected. They may include:
Enlarged lymph nodes in several sites (75%)
Haematological disorders: raised white count (or less often, reduced white count), eosinophilia (in 30% this is > 2.0 x 109/L), atypical lymphocytes, thrombocytopenia, anaemia, haemophagocytic syndrome
Liver enlargement, hepatitis, and rarely hepatic necrosis with liver failure. Abnormal liver function tests are found in 70–90%.
Inflammation of the heart (myocarditis) or pericarditis causing chest pain, breathlessness, and lowered blood pressure
Lung involvement causes shortness of breath and cough (interstitial pneumonitis, pleuritis, pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome)
Neurological involvement may lead to meningitis and encephalitis, polyneuritis, causing headache, seizures, coma, and palsies
Endocrine abnormalities: thyroiditis and diabetes
What are the complications of drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Causes of death from drug hypersensitivity syndrome include:
Acute liver failure causing coagulation problems, jaundice, and impaired consciousness
Fulminant myocarditis
How is drug hypersensitivity syndrome diagnosed?
The diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity syndrome is based on the clinical triad of:
It is supported by eosinophilia and abnormal liver function tests.
As drug hypersensitivity syndrome can occur up to eight weeks after first exposure to the responsible drug, a great degree of care is required when determining the responsible medication. A temporal association between medicine use and the start of the syndrome is the strongest evidence.
Reaction suspected to be drug-related
Enlarged lymph nodes at two sites
Involvement of at least one internal organ
Blood count abnormalities such as low platelets, raised eosinophils, or abnormal lymphocyte count.
Investigations in drug hypersensitivity syndrome
After taking a careful history and performing skin and general examination, the following tests may be requested.
Skin biopsy usually shows dense infiltration of inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes and eosinophils, extravasated erythrocytes, and oedema.
Blood tests may include:
Blood count and coagulation studies
Biochemical tests: at least liver function, renal function, muscle enzymes
Viral serology: hepatitis B, C, EBV, CMV, HHV-6
Endocrine function: thyroid, glucose levels
Genetic susceptibility tests.
Urinalysis is undertaken to assess renal damage.
Cardiac and pulmonary evaluation may include electrocardiograph (ECG), echocardiogram, and chest X-ray. Scans may be performed to evaluate the liver, kidneys, and brain depending on clinical findings and the results of initial tests.
What is the treatment for drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Treatment consists of immediate withdrawal of all suspect medicines, followed by careful monitoring and supportive care. It is very important for patients presenting with a high fever and a rash, where a diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity syndrome is considered, to have blood tests as soon as possible.
Ciclosporin has been reported to be an alternative and effective treatment for drug hypersensitivity syndrome.
Additional treatment may include intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis, and immunomodulatory drugs such as cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, and rituximab.
Supportive treatment for the skin rash may include:
Oral antihistamines.
Fluid, electrolytes, and calorie intake may need attention. A warm environment and expert nursing care are required. Secondary infections may require antibiotics.
How can drug hypersensitivity syndrome be prevented?
Patients who develop drug hypersensitivity syndrome must avoid taking the causative medicine(s) again.
Cross-reactions are common between the three main aromatic anticonvulsant drugs (phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbitone). Patients who have experienced drug hypersensitivity syndrome with any one of these medicines must avoid all three.
Because genetic factors are suspected in drug hypersensitivity syndrome, first-degree relatives should be alerted to their elevated risk of developing hypersensitivity reactions to the same medicine(s).
What is the outlook for drug hypersensitivity syndrome?
Most patients fully recover from drug hypersensitivity within weeks to months. Relapse after initial improvement is common.
Patients recovering from drug hypersensitivity syndrome are thought to be at risk of developing autoimmune diseases.
The mortality from drug hypersensitivity syndrome is estimated at around 8%.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome Medsafe Prescriber Update article
Husain Z, Reddy B, Schwartz R. DRESS syndrome. Part I. Clinical perspectives. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013; 68: 693–705. PubMed
Husain Z, Reddy B, Schwartz R. DRESS syndrome. Part II. Management and therapeutics. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013; 68: 709–17. PubMed
Nguyen E, Yanes D, Imadojemu S, Kroshinsky D. Evaluation of cyclosporine for the treatment of DRESS syndrome. JAMA Dermatol. 2020 Mar 11. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2020.0048. Journal
Soria A, Bernier C, Veyrac G, Barbaud A, Puymirat E, Milpied B. Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms may occur within 2 weeks of drug exposure: A retrospective study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(3):606-11. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2019.09.036 PubMed: 31562941
Bullous drug eruptions
Blistering skin conditions
Understanding Drug Eruptions — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Dermatological emergencies — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Drug eruptions — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Dyshidrotic Eczema]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/dyshidrotic-eczema]
Dyshidrotic eczema (Pompholyx, Vesicular Hand Eczema) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx)
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) — extra information
Dyshidrotic hand eczema, Pompholyx, Vesicular endogenous hand eczema, Cheiropompholyx, Vesicular hand dermatitis, acute palmoplantar eczeama, cheiropedopompholyx, podopompholyx
201201000, 23856007, 402222007, 123698008, 402216003, 402218002, 784292007, 238561006
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx)
Author(s): Maitreyi Aria Jain (Medical Student) and Honorary Associate Professor Paul Jarrett (Dermatologist), Middlemore Hospital and Department of Medicine, The University of Auckland, New Zealand (2023)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is dyshidrotic eczema?
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) is an itchy, chronic, recurrent, often symmetric eruption on the palms of hands, fingers, and soles of the feet. It is characterised by small, deep-seated, 1–2 mm fluid-filled vesicles on these sites, which resolve after several weeks with scaling.
Debate exists around precise terminology and definitions but other names for this condition include pompholyx, acute and recurrent vesicular hand dermatitis, acute palmoplantar eczema, vesicular endogenous eczema, cheiropompholyx (affecting the hands), podopompholyx or pedopompholyx (affecting the feet), and cheiropodopompholyx.
Discrete vesicles and blisters on the palmar skin Vesicles and blisters on the fingers in vesicular eczema Extensive vesticulation and blistering on the soles - vesicular eczema is usually symmetrical
Who gets dyshidrotic eczema?
The exact prevalence of dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) is not known. Approximately 20% of patients assessed in a patch test clinic for hand dermatitis had dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx). Occurrence appears not to correlate with age or gender.
What causes dyshidrotic eczema?
The cause of dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) is not known.
It is not related to occlusion of sweat glands as was first thought when the disease was recognised over 100 years ago, but there are some factors associated with the disorder, including:
Atopy — the evidence is mixed with some reporting it as a risk and others not
Fungal infection — Tinea pedis can be associated with a dyshidrotic-like eruption
Photoinduction — associated with ultraviolet A exposure
Immunoglobulin therapy
Hyperhidrosis — excessive sweating is an aggravating factor
Seasonal variation can also aggravate a recurrence
Oral contraceptive pill
What are the clinical features of dyshidrotic eczema?
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) is a chronic, recurrent condition and appears as small, deep-seated, fluid-filled blisters (vesicles) on the sides of the fingers, hands, and feet.
The vesicles are small (1–2mm), often symmetrical, with no associated erythema, and they do not occur elsewhere on the body. Vesicles may coalesce into larger blisters.
It is extremely itchy.
The vesicles commonly resolve after 2–3 weeks with peeling.
Vesicles can also occur in other types of hand dermatitis.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) is described as ‘tapioca-like’ in darker skin types, emphasising the greater colour contrast of the vesicles compared to less pigmented skin.
What are the complications of dyshidrotic eczema?
Dyshidrotic eczema (pompholyx) can lead to:
Secondary infection, eg, bacterial infection with Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes producing lymphangitis and cellulitis
Paronychia and nail dystrophy if adjacent or proximal to the nail fold
Physical and psychological disability; potential economic cost due to loss of work opportunity.
How is dyshidrotic eczema diagnosed?
It is a clinical diagnosis as the history and clinical appearances are typical when other causes are excluded.
Unilateral involvement is suspicious for a fungal infection (eg, tinea manuum or tinea pedis), and skin scrapings should be taken for mycology.
Skin biopsy is rarely necessary, and shows a spongiotic eczema.
What is the differential diagnosis for dyshidrotic eczema?
Differential diagnosis includes the following skin conditions:
Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis
Tinea (manuum and pedis)
What is the treatment for dyshidrotic eczema?
Avoid aggravating factors where possible.
Potassium permanganate soaks may be useful in the acute phase.
topical steroids (usually potent or ultrapotent)
Pimecrolimus and tacrolimus
Regular use of emollients and moisturisers
Iontophoresis or botulinum toxin when used for hyperhidrosis
Topical antifungal medication if indicated for documented fungal infection.
Topical psoralens and ultraviolet light A (tPUVA).
Systemic treatments:
A short course of oral corticosteroids for immediate relief
Oral antibiotics or antifungal agents if indicated for secondary skin infection
Second-line agents include methotrexate, ciclosporin, azathioprine, and mycophenolate
Oral retinoids including alitretinoin, acitretin, and isotretinoin
Biologic agents including dupilumab.
What is the outcome for dyshidrotic eczema?
The disorder can be chronic and cyclic. Short-term or long-term second-line treatment may be needed depending on the behaviour of the disease. However, for many the disorder settles in time and treatments can be withdrawn.
Liu C, Toy J. Severe Dyshidrotic Eczema in Skin of Color. J Cutan Med Surg. 2022;26(6):648. doi 10.1177/12034754221101542. Journal
Lofgren SM, Warshaw EM. Dyshidrosis: epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and therapy. Dermatitis. 2006 Dec;17(4):165–181. doi 10.2310/6620.2006.05021. Abstract
Masuda-Kuroki K, Murakami M, Kishibe M, Kobayashi S, Okubo Y, Yamamoto T, et al. Diagnostic histopathological features distinguishing palmoplantar pustulosis from pompholyx. J Dermatol. 2019 May;46(5):399-408. doi 10.1111/1346-8138.14850. Journal
Waldman RA, DeWane ME, Sloan B, Grant-Kels JM, Lu J. Dupilumab for the treatment of dyshidrotic eczema in 15 consecutive patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 May;82(5):1251–2. doi 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.12.053. Journal
Wollina U. Pompholyx: a review of clinical features, differential diagnosis, and management. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2010;11(5):305–14. doi 10.2165/11533250-000000000-00000. Journal
Blistering skin conditions
Dyshidrotic eczema — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Easi Score]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/easi-score]
EASI score. Eczema area and severity index
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
EASI score — extra information
Eczema Area and Severity Index
Eczemas, Diagnosis and testing
Diagnosis and testing
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated January 2015.
Four signs of eczema used to calculate EASI severity score
Recording the EASI score
Example of an EASI score calculation
What is an EASI score?
An EASI score is a tool used to measure the extent (area) and severity of atopic eczema (Eczema Area and Severity Index). It takes a few minutes and experience to calculate it accurately. Then it's easy!
EASI score does not include a grade for dryness or scaling. Include only inflamed areas.
There are four body regions:
Face occupies 33% (17% each side), neck 33% (17% front and back) and scalp 33% of the head and neck region
Trunk (including genital area)
Front occupies 55% and back 45% of the trunk
Each arm occupies 50% of the upper limbs region (front or back of one arm is 25%)
Lower limbs (including buttocks)
Each leg occupies 45% (front or back of one leg is 22.5%) and buttocks 10% of the lower limbs region
Area score is recorded for each of the four regions of the body. The area score is the percentage of skin affected by eczema for each body region.
Percentage of skin affected by eczema in each region
No active eczema in this region
90–100%: the entire region is affected by eczema
Severity score is recorded for each of the four regions of the body. The severity score is the sum of the intensity scores for four signs. The four signs are:
Redness (erythema, inflammation)
Thickness (induration, papulation, swelling—acute eczema)
Scratching (excoriation)
Lichenification (lined skin, furrowing, prurigo nodules—chronic eczema).
The average intensity of each sign in each body region is assessed as: none (0), mild (1), moderate (2) and severe (3).
Intensity of redness, thickness/swelling, scratching, lichenification
Mild (just perceptible)
Four signs of eczema used to calculate EASI severity score
For each region, record the intensity for each of four signs and calculate the severity score.
Severity score = redness intensity + thickness intensity + scratching intensity + lichenification intensity
For each region, multiple the severity score by the area score and by a multiplier. The multiplier is different for each body site.
Head and neck: severity score x area score x 0.1 (in children 0–7 years, x 0.2)
Trunk: severity score x area score x 0.3
Upper limbs: severity score x area score x 0.2
Lower limbs: severity score x area score x 0.4 (in children 0–7 years, x 0.3)
Add up the total scores for each region to determine the final EASI score. The minimum EASI score is 0 and the maximum EASI score is 72.
Recording the EASI score
Example of an EASI score calculation
A 3-year-old child has an acute flare-up of atopic eczema. The flare-up affects limb flexures, and the child's trunk is also rather pink and dry.
The head and neck score is nil, as it is unaffected.
The trunk is mildly red (1), mildly thickened (1), not scratched (0) nor lichenified (0): severity score 2.
Around 60% of the trunk is affected; area score 4.
The eczema in the elbow flexure is moderately red (2), mildly thickened (1), moderately scratched (2) but not lichenifed (0): severity score 5.
Less than 10% of the arms is affected: area score 1.
The eczema behind the knees is severely red (3), severely thickened (3), severely scratched (3) and mildly lichenified (1): severity score 10.
The calculations for each region are severity score x area score x multiplier.
Trunk: 2 x 4 x 0.3 = 2.4
Upper limbs = 5 x 1 x 0.2 = 1.0
Lower limbs = 10 x 2 x 0.3 = 6.0
EASI = 2.4 + 1.0 + 6.0 = 9.4.
Hanifin JM, Thurston M, Omoto M, Cherill R, Tofte SJ, Graeber M. The eczema area and severity index (EASI): assessment of reliability in atopic dermatitis. EASI Evaluator Group. Exp Dermatol. 2001 Feb;10(1):11-8. PubMed
Download EASI user guide (Dec 2014) PDF file
EASI for clinical signs — including training materials
POEM — Patient Oriented Eczema Measure
POEM for adults (PDF file)
POEM for children (PDF file)
POEM for anyone (PDF file)
EASI Calculator mobile app
EASIscore.com online calculator
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Eczema Herpeticum]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/eczema-herpeticum]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Eczema herpeticum — extra information
Kaposi varicelliform eruption
Author: Dr Chin-Yun Lin, Dermatology Registrar, Auckland Hospital, New Zealand, 2010. DermNet update May 2023.
What is eczema herpeticum?
Eczema herpeticum is a disseminated viral infection characterised by fever and clusters of itchy blisters or punched-out erosions. It is most often seen as a complication of atopic dermatitis/eczema.
Eczema herpeticum is also known as Kaposi varicelliform eruption because it was initially described by Kaposi in 1887, who thought it resembled chickenpox/varicella.
What is the cause of eczema herpeticum?
Eczema herpeticum may also complicate recurrent herpes. However, repeated episodes of eczema herpeticum are unusual.
Eczema herpeticum can affect males and females of all ages but is more commonly seen in infants and children with atopic dermatitis. Patients with atopic dermatitis appear to have reduced immunity to herpes infection. Their underlying dermatitis can be mild to severe, active or inactive.
Eczema herpeticum is better called Kaposi varicelliform eruption when a breakdown of the skin barrier is not due to eczema. Examples of non-eczematous conditions prone to severe localised herpes infections are:
Benign familial pemphigus
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma/mycosis fungoides
Other viruses may occasionally be responsible for a similar eruption, such as eczema coxsackium due to coxsackievirus A16 (the cause of hand foot and mouth disease).
As smallpox has been eliminated, disseminated vaccinia as a consequence of smallpox vaccination is now very rare. It was reported to be very severe, with mortality of up to 50%.
What are the clinical features of eczema herpeticum?
Eczema herpeticum starts with clusters of itchy and painful blisters. It may affect any site but is most often seen on face and neck. Blisters can occur in normal skin or sites actively or previously affected by atopic dermatitis or another skin disease. New patches form and spread over 7–10 days and may rarely be widely disseminated throughout the body.
The patient is unwell, with fever and swollen local lymph nodes.
The blisters are monomorphic, that is, they all appear similar to each other.
They may be filled with clear yellow fluid or thick purulent material.
They are often blood-stained i.e., red, purple or black.
New blisters have central dimples (umbilication).
They may weep or bleed.
Older blisters crust over and form sores (erosions)
Lesions heal over 2–6 weeks.
Secondary bacterial infection with staphylococci or streptococci may lead to impetigo and cellulitis.
Severe eczema herpeticum may affect multiple organs, including the eyes, brain, lung, and liver. It can rarely be fatal.
Eczema herpeticum Eczema herpeticum Eczema herpeticum
How is eczema herpeticum diagnosed?
Eczema herpeticum can be diagnosed clinically when a patient with known atopic dermatitis presents with an acute eruption of painful, monomorphic clustered vesicles associated with fever and malaise. Viral infection can be confirmed by viral swabs taken by scraping the base of a fresh blister. Several laboratory tests are available.
Direct fluorescent antibody stain
PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) sequencing
Tzank smear showing epithelial multinucleated giant cells and acantholysis (cell separation)
Bacterial swabs should also be taken for microscopy and culture as eczema herpeticum may resemble impetigo and it can be complicated by secondary bacterial infection.
Skin biopsy reveals distinctive pathological changes.
What is the treatment of eczema herpeticum?
Eczema herpeticum is considered as one of the few dermatological emergencies. Prompt treatment with antiviral medication should eliminate the need for hospital admission.
Oral aciclovir 400–800 mg 5 times daily, or, if available, valaciclovir 1 g twice daily, for 10–14 days or until lesions heal. Intravenous aciclovir is prescribed if the patient is too sick to take tablets, or if the infection is deteriorating despite treatment.
Secondary bacterial skin infection is treated with systemic antibiotics.
Topical steroids previously have not been recommended but recent evidence suggests that they are safe to use, and may be necessary to treat active atopic dermatitis.
Consult an ophthalmologist when eyelid or eye involvement is seen or suspected.
Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapani RP. Dermatology: second edition. 2008.
Olson J, Robles DT, Kirby P, Colven R (2008). Kaposi varicelliform eruption (eczema herpeticum). Dermatology online journal 14(2):18.
Paul Krusinski, Kaposi Varicelliform Eruption, Medscape Reference.
David TJ, Longson M. Herpes simplex infections in atopic eczema. Arch Dis Child. 1985;60(4):338–43. PubMed Central
Steele L, Innes S, et al. Safety outcomes for topical corticosteroid use in eczema herpeticum: a single-centre retrospective cohort study. Br J Dermatol. 2023;188(2):295-297. doi:10.1093/bjd/ljac051 Journal
Atopic dermatitis/eczema
Atopic dermatitis: complications
Herpes virus infection – pathology
Blistering skin conditions
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Eczema Herpeticum: A Dermatologic Emergency – Medscape Dermatology Nursing
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Emollients And Moisturisers]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/emollients-and-moisturisers]
Emollients and Moisturizers (Moisturisers) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Emollients and moisturisers
Emollients and moisturisers — extra information
37338003, 48279009, 294193001, 292651000
Emollients and moisturisers
Author(s): Dr Libby Whittaker, Staff Writer, New Zealand (2022); Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2016)Previous contributors: Dr Mark Duffill, Dermatologist (1998); Isabella Boileau and Justin Mori (2019)
Edited by the DermNet content department
Side-effects and risks
What are emollients and moisturisers?
Moisturisers are products used to add moisture to the skin. Emollients are products used to soften and smooth skin (eg, lanolin, glycerol stearate). Although the terms emollient and moisturiser are often used synonymously, emollients can also be described as a specific ingredient of moisturisers.
There are often a number of available moisturisers. Options include:
Cetomacrogol and glycerine cream (sorbolene with glycerine) is a general-purpose moisturiser that is non-greasy, cheap, and available in bulk without prescription.
What are emollients and moisturisers used for?
Uses of moisturisers include:
Reducing skin dryness (xerosis) and scaling (ichthyosis)
Reducing transepithelial water loss (TEWL)
Maintenance of skin integrity, flexibility, and barrier function
Relieving skin symptoms such as itch
Treatment of skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis (eczema) and prevention of flare-ups
Disguising fine lines and wrinkles
Forming a base for other cosmetic products such as make-up.
What do moisturisers contain?
Components of moisturisers include emollients, occlusives, and humectants. Moisturisers may also contain other ingredients such as surfactants (cleansers), fragrances, and preservatives. Specially formulated products may also report antimicrobial, anti-itch, and anti-inflammatory actions.
The are various types of emollients available, these contain oily substances such as lanolin, glyceryl stearate, and soy sterols, that soften and smooth skin by filling cracks in the skin’s outermost layer.
Occlusive agents provide a hydrophobic (lipophilic) layer of oil on the surface of the skin, forming a protective barrier to reduce evaporative water loss from the stratum corneum (the outermost layer of the epidermis).
Examples of occlusive ingredients:
Dimethicone (a component of many barrier creams used to manage hand dermatitis).
The following products are ordered from most to least occlusive:
Ointments — best for dry, thick, scaly areas; long-lasting protective effect due to higher oil content, but some patients find them too greasy, especially on visible areas
Creams — suitable for broad application; lighter than ointments therefore more quickly absorbed but also require more frequent application
Lotions — often used for hairy areas such as the scalp, and/or for mild dryness elsewhere
Oils — eg, bath oils deposit a thin layer of oil on the skin upon rising from the water. A study has demonstrated decreased skin barrier function when frequent bath oils are used in infants less that 12 months of age.
Humectant agents are hydrophilic (‘water-loving’), therefore attract and retain water in the stratum corneum, similar to the natural hydrating factors found in corneocytes. They include:
Alpha hydroxy acids (eg, lactic acid or glycolic acid)
Urea and other acidic preparations often sting if applied to scratched or fissured skin. They are also keratolytic, ie, they have a descaling or peeling effect, which is important in the management of ichthyosis.
Anti-pruritic ingredients: include lauromacrogols (which exert a mild anaesthetic effect), menthol, and oatmeal;
Anti-inflammatory ingredients: include chamomile, aloe vera, and shea butter.
Many additional agents may be added to a moisturiser to appeal to the consumer. Be aware that marketing claims for these ingredients in reducing the signs of skin ageing can be misleading. Large molecules such as peptides and collagen cannot penetrate through the stratum corneum.
How to use moisturisers and emollients
To prevent skin dryness, soap cleansers and shower gels should be used sparingly, or not at all.
Moisturising soap substitutes are a good alternative for people with dry and/or sensitive skin.
Bath emollients are oils or emulsifiers designed to disperse in the bath, and are best used in conjunction with other moisturisers including leave-on products.
Combinations of products are often used, eg, soap substitutes +/- bath oils, as well as leave-on products.
Leave-on moisturising ointments, creams, and lotions are most effective when applied immediately after bathing, as water that has entered the epidermis remains there, but they can also be applied at other times.
Application frequency and quantity is dependent on the severity of the dry skin:
Very dry skin may benefit from a greasy, occlusive moisturiser applied every couple of hours, while slightly dry skin may only need a light moisturiser at night.
The amount of moisturiser applied per week in patients with eczema averages from 150–200 g in young children to 500 g in adults.
What are the benefits of moisturisers?
Reduced skin dryness, leading to improved skin integrity and barrier function.
In patients with eczema, use of moisturisers and emollients may be sufficient to control mild disease and eliminate symptoms; reduce severity of flare-ups; and reduce requirements for topical steroids.
Therapeutic effects of moisturisers are greatest in the first 6 hours after their application; regular application 2–3 times/day may be needed to maximise benefits.
What are the side-effects and risks of moisturisers?
Occlusive emollients can cause or aggravate acne, perioral dermatitis, folliculitis, and boils.
Thermal burns from paraffin-containing ointments on clothing or bedding can be dangerous and can occur if ignited by cigarettes or naked flames.
Moisturising products (bath oils in particular) can be slippery and care should be taken while getting in and out of the bath or shower to avoid falls. Use of a bath mat may minimise this risk.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Anderson PC, Dinulos JG. Are the new moisturizers more effective? Curr Opin Pediatr 2009; 21: 486–90. DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32832cfd3b. Journal
Danby SG, Chalmers J, Brown K, Williams HC, Cork MJ. A functional mechanistic study of the effect of emollients on the structure and function of the skin barrier. Br J Dermatol 2016; 175: 1011–9. DOI: 10.1111/bjd.14684. Journal
Hon KL, Kung JSC, Ng WGG, Leung TF. Emollient treatment of atopic dermatitis: latest evidence and clinical considerations. Drugs Context 2018; 7: 212530. DOI: 10.7573/dic.212530. PubMed Central
Purnamawati S, Indrastuti N, Danarti R, Saefudin T. The role of moisturizers in addressing various kinds of dermatitis: A review. Clin Med Res 2017; 115(2-3): 75–87. DOI: 10.3121/cmr.2017.1363. PubMed Central
Ridd MJ, Redmond NM, Hollinghurst S, et al. Choice of Moisturiser for Eczema Treatment (COMET): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 2015; 16: 304. DOI: 10.1186/s13063-015-0830-y. Journal
Ring J, Alomar A, Bieber T, et al. Guidelines for treatment of atopic eczema (atopic dermatitis) part I. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2012; 26: 1045–60. DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04635.x. Journal
Varothai S, Nitayavardhana S, Kulthanan K. Review article: Moisturizers for patients with atopic dermatitis. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2013; 31: 91-8. Journal
Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Arents BWM. Emollients and moisturizers for eczema: abridged Cochrane systematic review including GRADE assessments. Br J Dermatol 2017; 177: 1256–71. DOI: 10.1111/bjd.15602. Journal
Barrier function in atopic dermatitis
Occupational skin disease
How to use emollients — Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust (YouTube video)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Epidermoid Cyst]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/epidermoid-cyst]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Epidermoid cyst — extra information
Follicular infundibular cyst, Infundibular cyst, Epidermal cyst, Keratin cyst, Keratinising cyst, Epithelial cyst, Epidermal inclusion cyst, Sebaceous cyst misnomer
419893006, 419603000
Author: Megan Lam, Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster University, Canada. DermNet NZ Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, April 2020. Minor amendment: Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist and Editor-in-Chief, March 2024.
Differential diagnoses
What is an epidermoid cyst?
An epidermoid cyst is a benign cyst derived from the infundibulum or upper portion of a hair follicle, encapsulated in a thin layer of epidermis-like epithelium. Epidermoid cysts are typically filled with keratin and lipid-rich debris [1,2].
Synonyms for an epidermoid cyst include:
Epidermal inclusion cyst
Follicular infundibular cyst
Sebaceous cyst (this is a common misnomer, as these cysts do not involve sebaceous glands, nor do they contain sebum).
Epidermoid cyst Epidermoid cyst with an obvious punctum Palpating an epidermoid cyst - note this accentuates the punctum
Who gets an epidermoid cyst?
Epidermoid cysts most commonly occur in adults, particularly when young-to-middle aged. They occur twice as frequently in men than in women [3]. They may occur frequently in acromegaly. Multiple small epidermoid cysts on the cheeks are seen associated with solar elastosis in Favre-Racouchot syndrome.
Genetic disorders which may increase the risk of developing multiple epidermoid cysts include [1]:
Pachyonychia congenita type 2
Basal cell naevus syndrome.
What causes an epidermoid cyst?
An epidermoid cyst generally results from an occluded pilosebaceous unit.
On non-hair-bearing areas of the body, such as the buttock, palm of the hand, or sole of the foot, an epidermoid cyst may be due to traumatic implantation of epidermal cells into the dermis where keratin accumulates within an epithelium-lined sac [2].
What are the clinical features of an epidermoid cyst?
The clinical features of an epidermoid cyst include [4]:
A firm, flesh-coloured or yellowish round papule or nodule fixed to the skin surface but typically mobile over deeper layers
Foul-smelling cheesy debris can be expressed from the central punctum.
Epidermoid cysts are most common on the central trunk (eg, chest and shoulders) and face but can occur almost anywhere on the body. Epidermoid cysts are common the scrotum and vulva. They may be solitary or multiple, and are generally asymptomatic.
The contents of a s small lid epidermoid cyst incised with a green needle A recurrent epidermoid cyst - note the scar from a previous incomplete excision
What are the complications of an epidermoid cyst?
Rupture of the cyst contents into the dermis results in swelling, redness, and tenderness. This can be due to trauma or bacterial infection, commonly by Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and group A streptococcus [1].
Surgical excision can lead to bleeding, secondary bacterial infection, and scarring. If the cyst has ruptured, or the capsule is not removed in its entirety, the cyst may recur.
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma may very rarely arise within an epidermoid cyst [5].
An inflamed cyst on the lid An inflamed cyst accentuating the punctum
How is an epidermoid cyst diagnosed?
The diagnosis of an epidermoid cyst is usually made clinically.
Biopsy is usually not required but the lesion may be excised for cosmetic reasons or due to complications. Histological features of an epidermoid cyst include [1]:
A cystic structure in the dermis
A single cavity (unilocular)
An epithelial lining without rete ridges and with a granular layer with keratinohyaline granules.
Ultrasound can be used in the initial evaluation of a soft tissue mass but is not usually required for a typical epidermoid cyst.
What is the differential diagnosis for an epidermoid cyst?
Differential diagnoses for an epidermoid cyst include:
Lipoma — a mobile 2–10 cm dome or egg-shaped subcutaneous lump with a rubbery or soft and smooth consistency
Trichilemmal cyst — a firm, mobile, 0.5–5 cm subcutaneous nodule without a central punctum, usually presenting on the scalp; it has a thick capsule and is not typically prone to rupture
Acne pseudocyst — this lacks a capsule and is associated with other signs of acne such as comedones, inflammatory papules, pustules, and nodules
Myxoid pseudocyst — a shiny papule arising at the end of a digit
Dermoid cyst — this has epidermal and dermal components and arises in early childhood
Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related epidermal cyst — a lesion with a hard, keratinous surface.
What is the treatment for an epidermoid cyst?
Most small uncomplicated epidermoid cysts will not require treatment.
The most effective treatment for an epidermoid cyst is complete surgical excision with an intact cyst capsule. Removal of the entire cyst lining decreases rates of recurrence [6]. This can be difficult to achieve following cyst rupture. Histological examination of the surgical specimen is recommended due to the small risk of malignant transformation and misdiagnosis [6].
What is the outcome for an epidermoid cyst?
Epidermoid cysts are typically benign and slow growing, rarely undergoing malignant transformation. Occasionally, they resolve spontaneously without intervention [1].
Zito PM, Scharf R. Cyst, Epidermoid (Sebaceous Cyst) [Updated 2019 Dec 25]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan. PubMed
Cuda JD, Rangwala S, Taube JM. Benign Epithelial Tumors, Hamartomas, and Hyperplasias. In: Kang S, Amagai M, Bruckner AL, Enk AH, Margolis DJ, McMichael AJ, Orringer JS. Eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology. 9th edition. New York, United States: McGraw-Hill.
Weir CB, St.Hilaire NJ. Epidermal Inclusion Cyst. [Updated 2019 Dec 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan. PubMed
Endrizzi B. Benign Tumors and Vascular Lesions. In: Soutor C, Hordinsky MK. Eds. Clinical Dermatology. 1st edition. New York, United States: McGraw-Hill.
Frank E, Macias D, Hondorp B, Kerstetter J, Inman JC. Incidental squamous cell carcinoma in an epidermal inclusion cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Case Rep Dermatol. 2018;10(1):61-8. doi:10.1159/000487794. PubMed Central
Wollina U, Langner D, Tchernev G, França K, Lotti T. Epidermoid cysts - a wide spectrum of clinical presentation and successful treatment by surgery: a retrospective 10-year analysis and literature review. Open Access Maced J Med Sci. 2018;6(1):28–30. doi:10.3889/oamjms.2018.027. PubMed Central
Epidermoid cyst pathology
Cutaneous cysts and pseudocysts
Epidermoid cysts — Mayo Clinic Resource
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Erythema Annulare Centrifugum]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/erythema-annulare-centrifugum]
Erythema annulare centrifugum
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Erythema annulare centrifugum
Erythema annulare centrifugum — extra information
EAC, Erythema figuratum perstans
Systemic diseases, Rashes
Erythema annulare centrifugum
Author: Dr Karen Koch, Dermatologist, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. June 2019.
Differential diagnoses
What is erythema annulare centrifugum?
Erythema annulare centrifugum is a chronic reactive form of annular erythema characterised by erythematous, circular, arciform, and polycyclic lesions, with a characteristic delicate scale behind the advancing edge (‘trailing scale’).
Erythema annulare centrifugum Annular erythema Erythema annulare centrifugum
Who gets erythema annulare centrifugum?
Erythema annulare centrifugum most often occurs in adults, but all ages can be affected. The average age of onset is 40 years [1].
What causes erythema annulare centrifugum?
The most commonly associated conditions are:
Cutaneous fungal infection (tinea pedis)
Adverse reaction to medications
Haematological disorders
Dietary causes of erythema annulare centrifugum include blue cheese and tomatoes. Stress has also been associated with the disease [1,3].
What are the clinical features of erythema annulare centrifugum?
Erythema annulare centrifugum typically affects the thighs, buttocks, and upper arms. However, any location on the body can be affected.
Erythema annulare centrifugum usually starts as a small pink papule that gradually enlarges over several weeks to form annular plaques with central clearing. These plaques can vary in size from a few millimetres to a few centimetres in size. Annular lesions can be partial (arciform) and coalesce to form polycyclic (ringed), serpiginous (wavy), and gyrate (revolving) patterns.
Classically, the annular or arciform lesions have an advancing outer erythematous edge with a trailing (inner) scaly edge. The rash may be itchy.
How is erythema annulare centrifugum diagnosed?
Erythema annulare centrifugum can sometimes be diagnosed on clinical features alone if the characteristic trailing scale is present. The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin biopsy in which the typical features of superficial or deep erythema annulare centrifugum are noted: a dense perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate involving either the superficial or deep vascular plexus, which is known as a ‘coat-sleeve’ appearance. Secondary changes to the epidermis may include spongiosis (inflammation of intercellular oedema), parakeratosis (disturbance in the keratinisation process), and hyperkeratosis (thickening of the outer layer of the epidermis) [2].
Investigations for an underlying cause should be guided by the patient's history and examination findings. An age- and symptom-appropriate cancer screening should be undertaken.
Toenail clippings and skin scrapings should be submitted for mycology if onychomycosis, tinea pedis, or tinea corporis are suspected.
What is the differential diagnosis for erythema annulare centrifugum?
Several skin conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis of erythema annulare centrifugum. Conditions to consider include other forms of annular erythema:
Erythema perstans — a paraneoplastic eruption associated with underlying malignancy in which there are concentric and whirling rings
Erythema gyratum repens — a paraneoplastic rash with a typical ‘wood-grain’ appearance from rapidly expanding erythematous lines in a concentric pattern
Necrolytic migratory erythema — ring-shaped red rashes that blister, erode, and crust over time; this classically occurs with an underlying glucagonoma (a glucagon-producing tumour that develops in the Islets of Langerhans)
Erythema marginatum — a rash occurring in acute rheumatic fever; this classically appears as pink or red macules or papules that spread outwards in a circular shape with a sharp border
Erythema multiforme — targetoid lesions occurring on the backs of hands and tops of feet (but that may occur anywhere); lesions consist of sharply demarcated, reddish-pink macules that gradually enlarge to form plaques; the central part of the lesions changes colour or clears, creating rings
Erythema migrans (the first stage of Lyme disease) — an expanding red patch of skin that starts at the site of a tick bite and gradually expands to reach several dozens of centimetres in size.
Other disorders to be considered include:
Tinea (dermatophyte infection) — gradually enlarging, itchy, and scaly annular lesions with central clearing
Granuloma annulare — an annular rash with a rubbery, raised, smooth erythematous edge with central clearing
Erythema papulatum centrifugum — a sweat-related itchy condition where erythematous papules form enlarging annular and arciform structures on the trunk and limbs
Secondary syphilis — this may present with non-itchy scaly annular and polycyclic plaques
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus, especially subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Annular scaly plaques are also common in discoid eczema, chronic plaque psoriasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis, pityriasis rosea, porokeratosis, and sarcoidosis.
What is the treatment for erythema annulare centrifugum?
It is essential to identify and treat the underlying cause of erythema annulare centrifugum where possible, such as a cutaneous fungal infection.
Topical medications that have been used to treat erythema annulare centrifugum include:
Topical corticosteroid
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus and pimecrolimus).
Systemic medications that have been used to treat the underlying cause of erythema annulare centrifugum include:
Etanercept [8] has been reported to induce remission in a case of widespread erythema annulare centrifugum.
What is the outcome for erythema annulare centrifugum?
Erythema annulare centrifugum tends to recur over several months or years, but it can spontaneously remit. Kim et al showed that 18.5% of affected individuals had persistent skin lesions for over 1 year and that the average duration of skin lesions was 4.7 months [1].
Kim DH, Lee JH, Lee JY, Park YM. Erythema annulare centrifugum: analysis of associated diseases and clinical outcomes according to histopathologic classification. Ann Dermatol 2016; 28: 257–9. DOI: 10.5021/ad.2016.28.2.257. PubMed Central
Weyers W, Diaz-Cascajo C, Weyers I. Erythema annulare centrifugum: results of a clinicopathologic study of 73 patients. Am J Dermatopathol 2003; 25: 451–62. DOI: 10.1097/00000372-200312000-00001. PubMed
Kruse LL, Kenner-Bell BM, Mancini AJ. Pediatric erythema annulare centrifugum treated with oral fluconazole: a retrospective series. Pediatr Dermatol 2016; 33: 501–6. DOI: 10.1111/pde.12909. PubMed
Sardana K, Chugh S, Mahajan K. An observational study of the efficacy of azithromycin in erythema annulare centrifugum. Clin Exp Dermatol 2018; 43: 296–9. DOI: 10.1111/pde.12909. PubMed
Yalamanchili R, Shastry V, Betkerur J. Clinico-epidemiological study and quality of life assessment in melasma. Indian J Dermatol 2015; 60: 519. DOI: 10.4103/0019-5154.164415. PubMed
De Aloe G, Rubegni P, Risulo M, Sbano P, Poggiali S, Fimiani M. Erythema annulare centrifugum successfully treated with metronidazole. Clin Exp Dermatol 2005; 30: 583–4. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2230.2005.01796.x. PubMed
Minni J, Sarro R. A novel therapeutic approach to erythema annulare centrifugum. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006; 54 (3 Suppl 2): S134–5. DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2005.11.1044. PubMed
Erythema annulare centrifugum pathology
Cutaneous markers of internal malignancy
Erythema annulare centrifugum — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Erythema Multiforme]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/erythema-multiforme]
Erythema multiforme - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Erythema multiforme — extra information
EM, Erythema multiforme minor, Erythema multiforme major
EB12.Z, DA01.13, EB12.Y, EA5Y, EB12.0, ED12.1, EB12.Y
36715001, 123571000119104, 402971008, 403441003, 707314000, 403212009, 762375006, 238818000, 297942002
Author: Dr Claudia King, Medical Officer, Adelaide, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. February 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is erythema multiforme?
Erythema multiforme is an immune-mediated, typically self-limiting, mucocutaneous condition characterised by ‘target’ lesions. Significant mucosal involvement distinguishes erythema multiforme major from multiforme minor. Episodes can be isolated, recurrent, or persistent.
Erythema multiforme is a distinct entity from Steven Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).
Cutaneous adverse reaction to anticonvulsant, erythema multiforme target lesions Erythema multiforme minor Erythema multiforme Erythema multiforme Lip involvement in erythema multiforme Erythema multiforme of eye
Who gets erythema multiforme?
Erythema multiforme affects less than 1% of the population. It is most common in young adults (aged 20–40 years) with a modest predominance in males. There is no association with race.
There appears to be a genetic predisposition in people carrying the HLA-DQB1*0301 allele, which shares an even stronger association with herpes-related erythema multiforme. Multiple other alleles have been associated with its recurrent form.
What causes erythema multiforme?
Vulvovaginal candidiasis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection is often listed as a trigger of erythema multiforme, however mucocutaneous manifestations associated with this infection have recently been classified as their own independent entity, reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption (RIME).
Medications which may trigger erythema multiforme include:
Antibiotics (including erythromycin, nitrofurantoin, penicillins, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Vaccinations (most common cause in infants).
Other conditions associated with erythema multiforme (usually in persistent disease) include:
Inflammatory bowel disease
Solid organ cancer malignancy.
Most research on the mechanism of disease has focused on the herpes-associated presentation. The herpes virus is phagocytosed by mononuclear cells which express cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (a skin-homing receptor). Engulfed viral DNA is then transferred to the epidermis and into keratinocytes. Within the keratinocyte layer, expression of viral DNA fragments induces a cell-mediated immune response, including the production of interferon-γ which upregulates the inflammatory process.
What are the clinical features of erythema multiforme?
Many patients report prodromal symptoms including fatigue, malaise, myalgia, or fever. These likely represent the course of precipitating illness rather than true prodrome.
Cutaneous lesions develop at the peripheries before spreading centrally.
Distribution is usually symmetrical with a preference for extensor surfaces.
May be painful, pruritic, or swollen.
Early lesions present as round, erythematous papules which later develop into target lesions.
Target lesions consist of three concentric rings of colour variation:
A central, dusky area of epidermal necrosis
Surrounded by a lighter oedematous area
With a peripheral erythematous margin.
Atypical lesions may be present with typical lesions. Atypical lesions are raised with poorly defined borders and/or fewer zones of colour variation.
In severe disease, up to hundreds of lesions may be present in different developmental stages, at times making it difficult to identify characteristic lesions.
Lesions develop as blisters, which then break to reveal shallow erosions with a white overlying pseudo-membrane.
Erythema multiforme favours oral membranes, but may also present with urogenital and, rarely, ocular lesions.
Mucous membrane involvement can be painful and significantly limit oral intake; lesions may precede or follow cutaneous lesions.
Symptoms are expected to self-resolve within 4 weeks from onset (or up to 6 weeks in severe disease).
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
No documented variation across skin type.
No known associations with race.
What are the complications of erythema multiforme?
Cutaneous lesions resolve without scarring, though hyperpigmentation may persist for several months.
Ocular involvement can lead to more serious complications including:
Conjunctival scarring
Permanent visual impairment.
How is erythema multiforme diagnosed?
Diagnosis is often made based on history and clinical examination.
Complete blood examination
Liver functions tests
Serological testing for infectious causes
Skin biopsy with histopathology and direct immunofluorescence can be non-specific but helps to distinguish erythema multiforme from other more serious differentials, such as autoimmune blistering diseases. Upper dermal oedema and individual epidermal keratinocyte necrosis are suggestive pathological features.
All patients with recurrent erythema multiforme should be tested for herpes simplex virus, including sampling of skin or mucosal lesions. In recurrent or persistent erythema multiforme without a clear precipitant, consider work up for solid organ or haematological malignancies.
What is the differential diagnosis for erythema multiforme?
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Polymorphous light eruption
Rowell syndrome (erythema multiforme-like lesions in systemic lupus erythematosus)
What is the treatment for erythema multiforme?
Treatment is often not needed as episodes are typically self-limiting with no ongoing complications. However, ocular involvement should always prompt ophthalmology referral given the risk for more serious sequelae.
Itch — oral antihistamines and/or topical steroids for itch or discomfort associated with cutaneous lesions
Pain — for mild mucosal involvement, oral washes containing antiseptic or local anaesthetic.
Other treatments are dependent on cause:
Precipitating infections — treat appropriately (note treatment of HSV does not significantly alter the course of single episode erythema multiforme)
Offending medications — cease and avoid in future.
Severe mucosal disease:
May require hospital admission for support of oral intake
At least 6 months of continuous oral antiviral therapy (typically acyclovir/aciclovir), even if a clear cause has not been identified
Remission can be difficult to achieve; may require trial of more prolonged therapy or alternative antiviral.
What is the outcome for erythema multiforme?
Erythema multiforme is self-limiting with little to no ongoing complication in most patients. Recurrent or persistent disease comes with additional treatment challenges, but remission can be achieved.
Canavan TN, Mathes EF, Frieden I, Shinkai K. Mycoplasma pneumoniae-induced rash and mucositis as a syndrome distinct from Stevens-Johnson syndrome and erythema multiforme: a systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(2):239–45. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.06.026. Journal
de Risi-Pugliese T, Sbidian E, Ingen-Housz-Oro S, Le Cleach L. Interventions for erythema multiforme: a systematic review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019;33(5):842–9. doi:10.1111/jdv.15447. Journal
Lerch M, Mainetti C, Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B, Harr T. Current Perspectives on Erythema Multiforme. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2018;54(1):177–84. doi:10.1007/s12016-017-8667-7. Journal
Soares A, Sokumbi O. Recent Updates in the Treatment of Erythema Multiforme. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021;57(9):921. Published 2021 Sep 1. doi:10.3390/medicina57090921. Journal
Sokumbi O, Wetter DA. Clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of erythema multiforme: a review for the practicing dermatologist. Int J Dermatol. 2012;51(8):889–902. doi:10.1111/j.1365-4632.2011.05348.x. Journal
Trayes KP, Love G, Studdiford JS. Erythema Multiforme: Recognition and Management. Am Fam Physician. 2019;100(2):82–88. Journal
Zoghaib S, Kechichian E, Souaid K, Soutou B, Helou J, Tomb R. Triggers, clinical manifestations, and management of pediatric erythema multiforme: A systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;81(3):813–22. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2019.02.057. Journal
Erythema multiforme: histological features and mechanisms
Bullous drug eruptions
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Dermatological emergencies — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Erythema multiforme — NHS
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Erythema Nodosum]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/erythema-nodosum]
Erythema nodosum: Symptoms, Causes, and Management — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Erythema nodosum — extra information
Systemic diseases, Rashes
3286100569688007, 240360007, 961007, 74610006, 297940005, 238675007, 402969008
Original article (1997) updated by: Ardalan Akbari, Medical Student, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct Assoc. Prof. Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. October 2019.
Differential diagnoses
What is erythema nodosum?
Erythema nodosum is a type of panniculitis, an inflammatory disorder affecting subcutaneous fat. It presents as tender red nodules on the anterior shins. Less commonly, they affect the thighs and forearms [1–3].
Erythema nodosum Erythema nodosum Erythema nodosum
Who gets erythema nodosum?
Erythema nodosum can occur in all ethnicities, sexes, and ages, but is most common in women between the ages of 25 and 40 [4]. It is 3–6 times more common in women than in men except before puberty when the incidence is the same in both sexes [5].
What are the causes of erythema nodosum?
Throat infections (streptococcal disease or viral infection)
Primary tuberculosis (TB), a rare cause in New Zealand
Yersinia infection; this causes diarrhoea and abdominal pain
Fungal infection: histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis
Parasitic infection: amoebiasis, giardiasis
Other viral and bacterial diseases associated with erythema nodosum include herpes simplex, viral hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, Campylobacter infection, and Salmonella infection.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease)
Sarcoidosis (11–-25%); X-ray shows bilateral hilar adenopathy in Löfgren syndrome
What are the clinical features of erythema nodosum?
Erythema nodosum presents with tender bilateral erythematous subcutaneous nodules 3–20 cm in diameter erupting over one to several weeks. They are accompanied by fever and joint pain. In 50% the ankle is swollen and painful for up to several weeks. The knees and other joints can also be affected [8].
Common clinical findings [9-12]
The nodules are found on the anterior lower legs, knees and arms and rarely on the face and neck.
They are ill-defined, warm, oval, round or arciform, and without ulceration
The nodules are initially bright to deep red.
They spontaneously resolve within eight weeks, through a violaceous, brownish, or yellowish/green bruise-like appearance known as erythema contusiformis.
Erythema nodosum does not cause permanent scarring.
What are the complications of erythema nodosum?
Erythema nodosum has few known complications and lesions usually resolve spontaneously. A rare complication is encapsulated fat necrosis, or ‘mobile encapsulated lipoma’ [14].
How is erythema nodosum diagnosed?
Erythema nodosum is primarily a clinical diagnosis confirmed by laboratory tests and histopathology [8]. The pathology of erythema nodosum shows inflammation primarily of the septa between the subcutaneous fat lobules without vasculitis [15].
Supporting investigations [4,7]
Appropriate tests may include:
Complete blood count with differential, C-reactive protein levels (infectious and inflammatory causes)
Chest X-ray (tuberculosis and sarcoidosis)
Throat swab and anti-streptolysin O and streptodornase serology (streptococcal infection)
Viral serology (preferably two samples at four-week intervals)
Stool culture and evaluation for ova and parasites in patients with gastrointestinal symptoms
Mantoux test or QuantiFERON gold (tests for TB).
Deep incisional or excisional skin biopsy.
What is the differential diagnosis for erythema nodosum?
A range of causes of panniculitis should be considered in a patient with subcutaneous nodules, especially if lesions are not located on the legs, there is ulceration, or symptoms last longer than eight weeks.
Panniculitis can be predominantly septal (inflammation between lobules) or lobular (inflammatory cells within subcutaneous fat lobules) [16]. Mixed septal and lobular inflammation can occur.
Nodules due to predominantly septal panniculitis include:
Various forms of scleroderma
Medium vessel vasculitis, for example, due to polyarteritis nodosa in which there are tender subcutaneous nodules associated with ulceration, necrosis, livedo racemosa, fever, joint pain, myalgia, and peripheral neuropathy
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Eosinophilic panniculitis
Nodules due to predominantly lobular panniculitis include:
Connective tissue disease (eg, panniculitis associated with cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
Erythema nodosum leprosum (type 2 lepra reaction due to leprosy)
Pancreatic panniculitis in which subcutaneous nodules may become ulcerated or fluctuant. Laboratory tests reveal elevated lipase, amylase and trypsin levels
Traumatic panniculitis
Nodular vasculitis/erythema induratum in which ulcerated, draining nodules affect the posterior calves
Lipodermatosclerosis, which is a consequence of venous insufficiency
Infection of the subcutaneous fat with bacteria, mycobacteria or fungi, which may cause ulcerated, fluctuant, and draining abscesses
Malignant infiltration.
What is the treatment for erythema nodosum?
Erythema nodosum is treated based on the underlying disease. An underlying infection should be treated.
Pain management may include extended rest, colchicine (1–2 mg/day), NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), and venous compression therapy [4].
Systemic corticosteroids (1 mg/kg daily until resolution of erythema nodosum) may be prescribed if infection, sepsis, and malignancy have been ruled out [9,11].
Oral potassium iodide as a supersaturated solution (400–900 mg/day) may be prescribed for one month if available [17].
What is the outcome for erythema nodosum?
Cox NH, Jorizzo JL, Bourke JF, Savage COS. Vasculitis, neutrophilic dermatoses and related disorders. In: Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology. 8th edn. Burns T, Breathnach S, Cox N, Griffiths C (eds). Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken 2010: Vol 3, 50.1.
Patterson JW. Panniculitis. In: Dermatology. 3rd edn. Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV (eds). Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia 2012: 1641.
Kunz, Beutel, Bröcker. Leucocyte activation in erythema nodosum. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999;24:396-401. PubMed
Hafsi W, Haseer Koya H. Erythema, Nodosum. StatPearls Publishing. Updated 12 December 2017. Available at: (accessed 27 June 2018).
R.M. Söderstrom, E.A. Krull. Erythema nodosum. A review. Cutis 1978;21(6)806-10. PubMed
Schwartz RA, Nervi SJ. Erythema nodosum: a sign of systemic disease. Am Fam Physician 2007;75:695. PubMed
L Requena et al, in K, Wolff et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009, 152-3.
Fox MD, Schwartz RA. Erythema nodosum. Am Fam Physician 1992;46:818–22. PubMed
Kakourou T, Drosatou P, Psychou F, Aroni K, Nicolaidou P. Erythema nodosum in children: a prospective study. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001;44:17–21. PubMed
Requena L, Yus ES. Panniculitis. Part I. Mostly septal panniculitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001;45:163–83. PubMed
Mert A, Ozaras R, Tabak F, Pekmezci S, Demirkesen C, Ozturk R. Erythema nodosum: an experience of 10 years. Scand J Infect Dis 2004;36:424–7. PubMed
Patterson JW. Panniculitis. In: Dermatology, 3rd ed, Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV (eds), Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia 2012:1641.
Weedon D. Panniculitis. In Weedon's Skin Pathology (Third Edition). Churchill Livingstone, 2010: 477. Available at: (accessed 20 June 2018).
Baldock NE, Catterall MD. Erythema nodosum from Yersinia enterocolitica. Br J Dermatol 1975;93:719–20. Journal
Pink A, Barker J. Erythema nodosum. Br J Hosp Med 2012;73:C50-C52. Journal
Marshall JK, Irvine EJ. Successful therapy of refractory erythema nodosum associated with Crohn's disease using potassium iodide. Can J Gastroenterol 1997;11:501–2. PubMed
Erythema nodosum pathology
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Erythema nodosum leprosum (type 2 lepra reaction in leprosy)
Erythema Nodosum — Medscape Reference
Erythema nodosum — Merck Manual Professional version
Erythema nodosum — Merck Manual Consumer version
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Erythrasma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/erythrasma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Erythrasma — extra information
Corynebacteria minutissimum infection
238418005, 83594007, 264207005
Author: Reviewed and updated by Dr Amanda Oakley Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand; Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, June 2014; Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University London, United Kingdom, July 2016.
Erythrasma is a common skin condition affecting the skin folds under the arms, in the groin and between the toes.
Who gets erythrasma?
Erythrasma affects males and females, but it is thought to be more common in the groin of males and between the toes of females.
It is reported to be more prevalent in the following circumstances:
Other immunocompromised states.
What causes erythrasma?
The bacteria responsible for erythrasma are gram-positive, non-spore-forming, aerobic or facultative bacilli called Corynebacterium minutissimum.
Erythrasma may coexist with or be confused with other causes of intertrigo including fungal infections such as tinea or Candida albicans (thrush).
What are the clinical features of erythrasma?
Erythrasma presents as well-defined pink or brown patches with fine scaling and superficial fissures. Mild itching may be present.
The common sites for erythrasma are armpits, groin and between the toes. The intergluteal fold, submammary, and periumbilical skin may also be affected. Widespread infections are most often associated with diabetes mellitus.
Erythrasma is classified into three types according to location.
Interdigital erythrasma: between the 3rd, 4th and 5th toe web spaces
Intertriginous erythrasma: in the armpits, groin, under the breasts and umbilicus
Generalised/disciform erythrasma: on the trunk
Wood's light fluorescence
What are the complications of erythrasma?
Serious complications are very rare. Corynebacteria have been reported to causes abscess, cellulitis, cutaneous granuloma, endocarditis, pyelonephritis, endophthalmitis, arteriovenous fistula infection and meningitis.
How is the diagnosis of erythrasma made?
Erythrasma has a typical clinical appearance. Diagnosis may be supported by the following investigations.
Wood lamp skin examination: long wavelength ultraviolet radiation causes erythrasma to fluoresce a coral-pink colour due to coproporphyrin III released by the bacteria. The fluorescence is not seen if the skin has recently been washed because the responsible porphyrin is water soluble.
Swab or skin scrapings: microscopy with periodic acid–Schiff, methenamine silver, or a Gram stain may reveal gram-positive filamentous rods. Methylene blue also stains C. minutissimum.
What is the treatment for erythrasma?
Erythrasma can be treated with antiseptic or topical antibiotic such as:
Clindamycin solution
Whitfield ointment (3% salicylic acid, 6% benzoic acid in petrolatum).
Extensive infection can be treated with oral antibiotics, including erythromycin or tetracycline and usually responds promptly.
Photodynamic therapy using red light (broadband, peaking at 635 nm) has also been used to treat patients with erythrasma.
How is erythrasma prevented?
Recurrence of erythrasma is common. Antibacterial soap can be used to prevent recurrence. Treatment can be repeated if necessary.
Bolognia, Jean L., et al. Dermatology Essentials E-Book. Elsevier Health Sciences, 2014.pg 581–582.
SARKANY I, TAPLIN D, BLANK H. The etiology and treatment of erythrasma. J Invest Dermatol. 1961 Oct;37:283–90. PubMed PMID: 14497222. PubMed.
Morales-Trujillo ML, Arenas R, Arroyo S. [Interdigital erythrasma: clinical, epidemiologic, and microbiologic findings]. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2008 Jul-Aug;99(6):469–73. Spanish. PubMed PMID: 18558055. PubMed.
Chodkiewicz HM, Cohen PR. Erythrasma: successful treatment after single-dose clarithromycin. Int J Dermatol 2013; 52:516.
Avci O, Tanyildizi T, Kusku E. A comparison between the effectiveness of erythromycin, single-dose clarithromycin and topical fusidic acid in the treatment of erythrasma. Journal of Dermatological Treatment. 2013 Feb 1;24(1):70–4. PubMed.
Santos-Juanes J, Galache C, Martinez-Cordero A, et al. Cutaneous granulomas caused by corynebacterium minutissimum in an HIV-infected man. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol . 2002 Nov. 16(6):643–5.PubMed.
Dalal A, Likhi R. Corynebacterium minutissimum bacteremia and meningitis: a case report and review of literature. J Infect. 2008 Jan. 56(1):77–9. PubMed.
Erythrasma – pathology
Erythrasma — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Erythroderma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/erythroderma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Erythroderma — extra information
Exfoliative dermatitis, Erythrodermatitis, Generalised exfoliative dermatitis
EB10, EH64, EA90.3, EA80.1, EA80.2, EH40.2, EA94
399992009, 238992001, 238544008, 402300003, 3755001
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, February 2016.
What is erythroderma?
Erythroderma is the term used to describe intense and usually widespread reddening of the skin due to inflammatory skin disease. It often precedes or is associated with exfoliation (skin peeling off in scales or layers), when it may also be known as exfoliative dermatitis (ED).
Who gets erythroderma and what is the cause?
Erythrodermic atopic dermatitis most often affects children and young adults, but other forms of erythroderma are more common in middle-aged and elderly people.
The most common skin conditions to cause erythroderma are:
Drug eruption — with numerous diverse drugs implicated (list of drugs)
Dermatitis especially atopic dermatitis
Psoriasis, especially after the withdrawal of systemic steroids or other treatment [see Erythrodermic psoriasis]
Pityriasis rubra pilaris
Other skin diseases that less frequently cause erythroderma may include:
Blistering diseases including pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid
Sezary syndrome (the erythrodermic form of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma)
Several very rare congenital ichthyotic conditions.
Erythroderma may also be a symptom or sign of systemic disease. These may include:
Haematological malignancies, such as lymphoma and leukaemia
Internal malignancies, such as carcinoma of rectum, lung, fallopian tubes, colon, prostate (paraneoplastic erythroderma)
Graft-versus-host disease
It is not known why some skin diseases in some people progress to erythroderma. The pathogenesis is complicated, involving keratinocytes and lymphocytes, and their interaction with adhesion molecules and cytokines. The result is a dramatic increase in turnover of epidermal cells.
What are the clinical features of erythroderma?
Erythroderma is often preceded by a morbilliform (measles-like) eruption, dermatitis, or plaque psoriasis. Generalised erythema can develop quite rapidly in acute erythroderma, or more gradually over weeks to months in chronic erythroderma.
Signs and symptoms of erythroderma
By definition, generalised erythema and oedema or papulation affect 90% or more of the skin surface.
The skin feels warm to the touch.
Itch is usually troublesome and is sometimes intolerable. Rubbing and scratching leads to lichenification.
Eyelid swelling may result in ectropion.
Scaling begins 2-6 days after the onset of erythema, as fine flakes or large sheets.
Thick scaling may develop on the scalp with varying degrees of hair loss including complete baldness.
Palms and soles may develop yellowish, diffuse keratoderma.
Nails become dull, ridged, and thickened or develop onycholysis and may shed (onychomadesis).
Lymph nodes become swollen (generalised dermatopathic lymphadenopathy).
Clues may be present as to the underlying cause.
Serous ooze, resulting in clothes and dressings sticking to the skin and an unpleasant smell, is characteristic of atopic erythroderma.
Persistence of circumscribed scaly plaques in certain sites such as elbows and knees suggests psoriasis.
Islands of sparing, follicular prominence, orange-hue to keratoderma are typical of pityriasis rubra pilaris.
Subungual hyperkeratosis, crusting on palms and soles, and burrows are indicative of crusted scabies.
Sparing of abdominal creases (deck chair sign) is typical of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji.
Systemic symptoms may be due to the erythroderma or to its cause.
Lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, abnormal liver dysfunction and fever may suggest a drug hypersensitivity syndrome or malignancy.
Leg oedema may be due to inflamed skin, high output cardiac failure and/or hypoalbuminaemia.
Complications of erythroderma
Erythroderma often results in acute and chronic local and systemic complications. The patient is unwell with temperature dysregulation and losing a great deal of fluid by transpiration through the skin.
Heat loss leads to hypothermia.
Fluid loss leads to electrolyte abnormalities and dehydration.
Red skin leads to high-output heart failure.
A secondary skin infection may occur (impetigo, cellulitis).
General unwellness can lead to pneumonia.
Hypoalbuminaemia from protein loss and increased metabolic rate causes oedema.
Longstanding erythroderma may result in pigmentary changes (brown and/or white skin patches).
How is erythroderma diagnosed?
The blood count may show anaemia, white cell count abnormalities, and eosinophilia. Marked eosinophilia should raise suspicions for lymphoma.
> 20% circulating Sézary cells suggests Sézary syndrome
C-reactive protein may or may not be elevated.
Proteins may reveal hypoalbuminaemia and abnormal liver function.
Polyclonal gamma globulins are common, and raised immunoglobulin E (IgE) is typical of idiopathic erythroderma.
Skin biopsies from several sites may be taken if the cause is unknown. They tend to show nonspecific inflammation on histopathology. Diagnostic features may also be present.
Direct immunofluorescence is of benefit if an autoimmune blistering disease or connective tissue disease is considered.
What is the treatment for erythroderma?
Erythroderma is potentially serious, even life-threatening, and the patient may require hospitalisation for monitoring and to restore fluid and electrolyte balance, circulatory status, and body temperature.
The following general measures apply:
Discontinue all unnecessary medications
Monitor fluid balance and body temperature
Maintain skin moisture with wet wraps, other types of wet dressings, emollients and mild topical steroids
Prescribe antibiotics for bacterial infection
Antihistamines may or may not be helpful for the itch.
If a cause can be identified then specific treatment should be started, such as topical and systemic steroids for atopic dermatitis; acitretin or methotrexate for psoriasis.
How can erythroderma be prevented?
People with known drug allergy should be made aware that they should avoid the drug forever, and if their reaction was severe, wear a drug alert bracelet. All medical records should be updated if there is an adverse reaction to a medication and referred to whenever starting a new drug.
What is the outlook for erythroderma?
Prognosis of erythroderma depends on the underlying disease process. If the cause can be removed or corrected, the prognosis is generally good.
If erythroderma is the result of a generalised spread of a primary skin disorder such as psoriasis or dermatitis, it usually clears with appropriate treatment of the skin disease but may recur at any time.
The course of idiopathic erythroderma is unpredictable. It may persist for a long time with periods of acute exacerbation.
Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Fourth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Okoduwa C, Lambert WC, Schwartz RA, et al. Erythroderma: review of a potentially life-threatening dermatosis. Indian Journal of Dermatology. 2009;54(1):1–6. doi:10.4103/0019-5154.48976. PubMed Central
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Dermatological emergencies online course
Drugs reported to cause erythroderma
Morbilliform drug eruptions
Erythroderma (Generalized Exfoliatve Dermatitis) — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Exanthems]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/exanthems]
Exanthems (reactive rashes)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Exanthems — extra information
271807003, 112625008, 238813009, 49882001
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2002. Updated September 2015.
What is an exanthem?
Exanthem is the medical name given to a widespread rash that is usually accompanied by systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise and headache. It is usually caused by an infectious condition such as a virus, and represents either a reaction to a toxin produced by the organism, damage to the skin by the organism, or an immune response.
Viral exanthem Viral exanthem Exanthem Exanthem Exanthem Exanthem Viral exanthem Viral exanthem Viral exanthem
What causes exanthems?
Exanthems during childhood are very common and are usually due to specific viral infections:
Chickenpox (varicella)
Measles (morbillivirus)
Rubella (rubella virus)
Roseola (herpes virus 6B)
Erythema infectiosum (parvovirus B19).
Viral exanthems also include:
Acute human immunodeficiency virus infection syndrome
Infectious mononucleosis and aminopenicillin rash (Epstein-Barr virus)
Papular purpuric glove and socks syndrome (parvovirus B19)
Pityriasis rosea (herpes virus 6 and 7)
Papular acrodermatitis of childhood
Laterothoracic exanthem
Nonspecific viral exanthem.
Exanthems caused by bacterial infections include:
Staphylococcal toxin infections:
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS)
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS).
Streptococcal toxin infections:
Streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome (STSS).
Other specific infections that can give rise to exanthems include:
Mycoplasma pneumonia
Rickettsial diseases.
Exanthems may also be due to a drug (especially antibiotics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). See:
Morbilliform drug eruption
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome.
Acute connective tissue diseases can present with an exanthem:
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Systemic-onset juvenile arthritis
Adult-onset Still disease.
Some exanthems are of unknown cause, for example, Kawasaki disease.
What are the signs and symptoms of exanthems?
Muscular aches and pains.
These signs and symptoms may vary depending on the cause of the exanthem. See individual causes for details. Viral exanthems often occur in small epidemics, so there may be other children effected at the same time.
Diagnosis of exanthems
Many exanthems have distinct patterns of rashes and prodromal (pre-rash) symptoms allowing clinical diagnosis.
Viral swab for viral culture, immunofluorescence and PCR
Blood tests for serology, PCR, RNA/DNA, ANA and tissue antibodies
What is the treatment for exanthems?
Treatment of specific exanthems will depend on the cause.
Symptomatic treatment may include:
Paracetamol to reduce fever
Moisturising emollients to reduce itch.
Viral skin infections
Chickenpox (varicella)
German measles (rubella)
Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
Rickettsial diseases
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS)
Morbilliform drug eruption
Adverse cutaneous reactions to drugs
Characterizing Viral Exanthems — Medscape Pediatric Health
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Facial Rashes]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/facial-rashes]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Facial rashes — extra information
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, May 2016.
Erosions and crusting
Brown macules and patches
Pale or white macules and papules
Patients often present with quite mild signs when they have a facial lesion or rash — due to embarrassment — and the diagnosis may be tricky.
Face: erosions/crusting
Monomorphic clustered vesicles or crusted papules
Often locally recurrent in the same site
Swabs: Herpes simplex
Acute dermatomal eruption
Painful: pain may precede the rash
Erythema may precede vesicles
Swabs: Herpes zoster
Irregular enlarging plaque
Honey-coloured crusts
Swabs for impetigo: Staphylococcus aureus +/- Streptococcus pyogenes
Herpes simplex Herpes zoster Impetigo
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis often also affects scalp, retroauricular sites, ears
Hairline, eyebrows, medial cheeks, nasolabial folds, chin creases
Poorly defined, variable white or yellowish flaking
May have erythematous patches or thin plaques
Follicular prominence or follicular digitate keratoses
Psoriasis sites include eyelids, temples, retro- and pre-auricular skin and/or seborrhoeic dermatitis sites
Also affects scalp, ears, elbows, knees, nails
Well-demarcated erythematous plaques
More persistent than seborrhoeic dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis often affects flexures: retroauricular, elbow and knee creases
Symmetrical dermatitis of eyelids, perioral skin (up to lips)
Acute flare: oedema, erythema, crusting, fissuring
Subacute: dryness, pinkness
Chronic: dryness, lichenification, Dennie Morgan folds (2 creases in lower eyelids)
Atopic eczema Psoriasis Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Acute, relapsing/intermittent or chronic presentation
Irregular, variable, unilateral or asymmetrical dermatitis
Photosensitive dermatitis
Exposed areas of face, arms, chest, legs
Spares under hair, eyelids, creases
Flares after exposure outdoors
Asymmetrical eruption
Annular configuration is common
Located on sun-exposed sites of temples, forehead, nose, cheekbones, angle of jaw, upper lip, lower vermilion lip
Actinic keratoses often involves persistent tender scaly papules, macules, plaques
Actinic keratoses Tinea faciei Tinea faciei
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Nose, cheeks, ears, lips, scalp
Circumscribed plaques with follicular prominence, scale
Post-inflammatory pigmentation, atrophic scarring
CBC, ANA, ENA often normal
Lupus tumidus / Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
Smooth surface to erythematous dermal plaques
Discoid lupus erythematosus Lupus tumidus / Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
Acne Closed comedones
Onset of acne often at puberty
Usually, symmetrical forehead, chin, lateral face, nose
Mixed inflammatory and non-inflammatory lesions
Papules, pustules, nodules, comedones
Perioral/periorificial dermatitis
Usually adult females using face cream, often topical corticosteroid
Often, asymmetrical first in perioral sites, later in perinasal and periocular sites
Spares a centimetre of skin around vermilion of lips
Grouped erythematous papules and pustules on erythematous patches, flaky surface
Can occur in children
Most prevalent in middle-aged adults
Mid-facial: cheeks + nose, chin and forehead
Erythema, flushing, papules, pustules, telangiectasia
Rhinophyma causes enlargement of the nose in some patients
Lesions in rosacea can approach the lips
Pseudofolliculitis barbae
Pseudofolliculitis barbae is most often associated with shaving
Follicular papules, pustules, curled-in hair
Perioral/periorificial dermatitis Pseudofolliculitis barbae Rosacea
Erythema is less pronounced in dark skin
Violaceous eyelids — may be swollen
Poikiloderma on the trunk and limbs
Gottron papules on fingers
May have muscle weakness
Intermittent redness when hot, embarrassed or with certain foods
Often lifelong tendency
Associated with rosacea
Spares eyelids, furrows, under the chin
Dermatomyositis Flushing Sunburn
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Butterfly erythematous rash
Systemic symptoms: tiredness, lethargy, arthralgia
May accompany flushing
Systemic LE Telangiectasia
Face: brown macules/patches
Pigmentation is more pronounced in dark skin
Small to large freckles
Well-demarcated flat or slightly scaly brown marks or thin plaques
Erythema dyschromicum perstans
Grey-brown discolouration
Distinct border, sometimes red at first
Usually adult female
Centrofacial, malar and mandibular patterns
Spares eyelids, rare below jawline
Symmetrical pigmentation with ragged border
Post-inflammatory pigmentation
Preceding eczema, psoriasis, acne etc
Distribution depends on cause
Erythema dyschromicum perstans Melasma Post-inflammatory pigmentation
Face: pale or white macules/patches
Guttate hypomelanosis
More commonly observed on limbs
Hypopigmentation, light scale
Guttate hypomelanosis Forehead pityriasis alba
Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation
Preceding eczema, psoriasis, acne etc
Distribution depends on cause
Most often periocular, perioral
White, smooth surface
Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation Vitiligo
Solitary thickened smooth, purplish-brown plaque or plaques
Yellowish-brown to mauve infiltrated plaque
May arise within existing scar
Lupus pernio affects nose and ears
Sebaceous hyperplasia
Yellowish papules with central follicular dimple
Sebaceous hyperplasia Granuloma faciale Sarcoidosis
Smoker, sun damaged older patient
Periocular, cheekbones, nose, neck
Basal cell carcinoma
Slowly enlarging, destructive papule, nodule or plaque
Early erosion, ulceration and bleeding
Squamous cell carcinoma
Enlarging tender scaly or crusted nodule
Solar comedones Basal cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma
Various types and syndromes
Follicular or eccrine origin
Periorbital or cheeks
Superficial firm small papules
Scattered on forehead, cheeks
Yellowish with central dell
Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome Milia
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Female Pattern Hair Loss]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/female-pattern-hair-loss]
Female pattern hair loss
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Female pattern hair loss
Female pattern hair loss — extra information
Androgenetic alopecia in females, Female pattern alopecia
403319002, 403318005
Female pattern hair loss
Author: Dr Leona Yip, Research Fellow, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2007. Updated by Prof Rod Sinclair, Melbourne, Australia, July 2015.
Introduction - normal hair growth cycle
Hair miniaturisation
What is female pattern hair loss?
Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) is a distinctive form of diffuse hair loss that occurs in women with androgenetic alopecia. Many women are affected by FPHL. Around 40% of women by age 50 show signs of hair loss and less than 45% of women reach the age of 80 with a full head of hair.
In FPHL, there is diffuse thinning of hair on the scalp due to increased hair shedding or a reduction in hair volume, or both. It is normal to lose up to 50-100 hairs a day. Another condition called chronic telogen effluvium also presents with increased hair shedding and is often confused with FPHL. It is important to differentiate between these conditions as management for both conditions differ.
FPHL presents quite differently from the more easily recognisable male pattern baldness, which usually begins with a receding frontal hairline that progresses to a bald patch on top of the head. It is very uncommon for women to bald following the male pattern unless there is excessive production of androgens in the body.
What causes female pattern hair loss?
FPHL has a strong genetic predisposition. The mode of inheritance is polygenic, indicating that there are many genes that contribute to FPHL, and these genes could be inherited from either parent or both. Genetic testing to assess the risk of balding is currently not recommended, as it is unreliable.
Currently, it is not clear if androgens (male sex hormones) play a role in FPHL, although androgens have a clear role in male pattern baldness. The majority of women with FPHL have normal levels of androgens in their bloodstream. Due to this uncertain relationship, the term FPHL is preferred to ‘female androgenetic alopecia’.
The role of oestrogen is uncertain. FPHL is more common after the menopause suggesting oestrogens may be stimulatory for hair growth. But laboratory experiments have also suggested oestrogens may suppress hair growth.
What is the normal hair growth cycle?
Image © 1998 Merck Sharpe and Dohme (with permission)
Increased hair shedding or telogen effluvium is a feature to FPHL. Women can use the hair shedding guide below to define whether hair shedding is normal or excessive,
To assess hair shedding, women should choose which of the six photographs of hair bundles best represents how much hair they shed on an average day.
Doctors can use the hair shedding scale to score hair loss at each patient visit to assess response to treatment. It can also be used in clinical trials to assess new treatments for excess hair shedding.
Baseline shedding scores
Hair miniaturisation
Unlike other areas of the body, hairs on the scalp to grow in tufts of 3–4. In androgenetic alopecia, the tufts progressively lose hairs. Eventually, when all the hairs in the tuft are gone, bald scalp appears between the hairs.
Hair miniaturisation
How long does it take for FPHL to progress?
FPHL can affect women in any age group, but it occurs more commonly after menopause. The hair loss process is not constant and usually occurs in fits and bursts. It is not uncommon to have accelerated phases of hair loss for 3–6 months, followed by periods of stability lasting 6–18 months. Without medication, it tends to progress in severity over the next few decades of life.
What are the effects of female pattern hair loss?
Many studies have shown that hair loss is not merely a cosmetic issue, but it also causes significant psychological distress. Compared to unaffected women, those affected have a more negative body image and are less able to cope with daily functioning. Hair loss can be associated with low self-esteem, depression, introversion, and feelings of unattractiveness. It is especially hard to live in a society that places great value on youthful appearance and attractiveness.
Should I have any hormone tests done?
Blood tests include female and male sex hormone levels as well as thyroid function, as part of the diagnostic workup.
The majority of women affected by FPHL do not have underlying hormonal abnormalities. However, a few women with FPHL are found to have excessive levels of androgens. These women also tend to suffer from acne, irregular menses and excessive facial and body hair. These symptoms are characteristic of the polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) although the majority of women with PCOS do not experience hair loss. Less often, congenital adrenal hyperplasia may be responsible.
What treatments are available?
Treatments are available for FPHL although there is no cure. It is important to manage expectations when seeking treatment, as the aim is to slow or stop the progression of hair loss rather than to promote hair regrowth. However, some women do experience hair regrowth with treatment. Results are variable, and it is not possible to predict who may or may not benefit from treatment.
A Cochrane systematic review published in 2012 concluded that minoxidil solution was effective for FPHL. Minoxidil is available as 2% and 5% solutions; the stronger preparation is more likely to irritate and may cause undesirable hair growth unintentionally on areas other than the scalp.
Hormonal treatment, i.e. oral medications that block the effects of androgens (e.g. spironolactone, cyproterone, finasteride and flutamide) is also often tried.
A combination of low dose oral minoxidil (eg, 2.5 mg daily) and spironolactone (25 mg daily) has been shown to significantly improve hair growth, reduce shedding and improve hair density.
Once started, treatment needs to continue for at least six months before the benefits can be assessed, and it is important not to stop treatment without discussing it with your doctor first. Long term treatment is usually necessary to sustain the benefits.
Cosmetic camouflages include coloured hair sprays to cover thinning areas on the scalp, hair bulking fibre powder, and hair wigs. Hair transplantation for FPHL is becoming more popular although not everyone is suitable for this procedure.
Low-level laser therapy is of unproven benefit in pattern balding, but one device has been approved by the FDA for marketing. Platelet-rich plasma injections are also under investigation. Further studies are required to determine the magnitude of the benefit if any.
Where do I go to seek help?
Your first stop would be to see your general practitioner (GP) who can perform a medical workup to exclude other reasons for hair loss. Your GP can refer you to a dermatologist for further management of FPHL. Sometimes, it may be necessary for your doctor to perform a scalp biopsy to confirm this diagnosis.
It is important to seek reliable information and advice from authoritative sources as there are many bogus treatments that are expensive and do not work.
Gan D, Sinclair R. Prevalence of male and female pattern hair loss in Maryborough. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 10(3), 184-9 (2005). Journal
The Australasian Hair and Wool Research Society patient information leaflet on Understanding androgenetic hair loss in women (2000).
Yip L, Sinclair R. Antiandrogen therapy for androgenetic alopecia. Expert Rev Dermatol 1(2):261–9 (2006). PubMed
Bad Hair Day by Francesca Collins, Sebastiana Bondo and Rodney Sinclair. Lothian Books, 2006 (highly recommended read for patients).
Sinclair R, Patel M, Dawson TL, Yazdabadi A, Yip L, Perez A, Rufaut NW. Hair loss in women: medical and cosmetic approaches to increase scalp hair fullness. Br J Dermatol 2011; 165: 12-18. PubMed
van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Carter B. Evidence-based treatments for female pattern hair loss: a summary of a Cochrane systematic review. Br J Dermatol 2012:167;995–1010. PubMed
Sinclair RD. Female pattern hair loss: a pilot study investigating combination therapy with low-dose oral minoxidil and spironolactone. Int J Dermatol. 2017 Dec 12. doi: 10.1111/ijd.13838. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 29231239. PubMed.
Olamiju, Brianna et al. Combination oral minoxidil and spironolactone for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in adolescent girls Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, Volume 84, Issue 6, 1689–1691; June 2021. Journal
Male pattern hair loss
Low-level laser therapy for hair loss
Psychological effects of hair loss
Androgenetic Alopecia — Medscape Reference
Patient information: Hair loss in men and women (The Basics) — UpToDate
Patient information: Hair loss in men and women (androgenetic alopecia) (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Fixed Drug Eruption]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/fixed-drug-eruption]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Fixed drug eruption — extra information
Reactions, Terminology
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2001; Updated: Dr Christine Condon, Resident Medical Officer, St Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne, Australia; A/Prof Rosemary Nixon AM, Dermatologist, Skin Health Institute, Carlton, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. March 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Appendix: list of causes
What is fixed drug eruption?
Fixed drug eruption is a distinctive cutaneous allergic reaction that characteristically recurs at the same site(s) on re-exposure to the medication or other chemical agent.
Fixed drug eruption Targetoid fixed drug eruption Blistering fixed drug eruption
## Who gets fixed drug eruption?
Fixed drug eruption affects both sexes, and affects adults more commonly than children. There are some examples of HLA-associations with fixed drug eruptions due to specific drugs eg, HLA-A30 with cotrimoxazole-induced fixed drug eruption.
What causes fixed drug eruption?
Fixed drug eruption is a delayed type IV hypersensitivity reaction. In the initial phase memory CD8+ T-cells at the dermo-epidermal junction release interferon-gamma when activated by the medication antigen causing epidermal basal layer damage. Recruited T-cells and neutrophils damage melanocytes and keratinocytes. During the resolution phase, dermal macrophages collect the melanin resulting in the typical post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation. Regenerating basal keratinocytes release interleukin-15 leading to the formation of resident memory CD8+ T-cells which remain quiescent but in a primed state ready to respond to the chemical antigen again.
Fixed drug eruption is usually due to oral medications, with antimicrobials and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) being the most common culprits. Less common drug exposures may be topical or intravaginal. Fixed food eruptions may be due to antibiotics, flavouring or colouring agents, or preservatives in the food. Herbal supplements and caffeine have also been implicated. For a more detailed list, see the Appendix at the end.
What are the clinical features of fixed drug eruption?
Fixed drug eruption can be categorised by clinical morphology. The most common form is the localised pigmenting type; other presentations include bullous (localised or generalised), mucosal, non-pigmenting, or generalised.
Fixed drug eruption typically presents as a single (or small number of) well-defined, round or oval red or violaceous patch or plaque which may blister or ulcerate. It is usually asymptomatic but can be itchy or painful. Over the next few days and weeks, the surface may become scaly or crusted before peeling, and the colour fades to leave brown post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation. Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation tends to be more prominent in skin of colour.
In contrast to many other drug eruptions, the patient remains systemically well.
The hands and feet, eyelids, and anogenital areas are common sites. Lesions in the oral mucosa are usually found on the lips, tongue and hard palate. A fixed drug eruption may occur at the same location as previous skin trauma such as a burn, insect bite, or venepuncture.
On the first occasion, the eruption may develop after weeks to years of regular ingestion of the drug, but subsequent episodes develop within minutes to hours of recommencing the implicated drug. A patch of fixed drug eruption shows a refractory period during which it will not flare even with re-exposure. With subsequent episodes, the original patch may enlarge and more patches may appear. The post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation darkens with each recurrence.
Fixed drug eruption   Targetoid lesion in fixed drug eruption
Clinical variants of fixed drug eruption
Mucosal fixed drug eruption
Involves lips, tongue, hard palate, genital mucosa
Blisters and erosions are common
Can be isolated/localised or may occur with cutaneous lesions
Oral mucosal lesions commonly due to cotrimoxazole and naproxen
Genital mucosal lesions: glans penis – cotrimoxazole; vulva – NSAIDs.
Mucosal fixed drug eruption
Pigmented fixed drug eruption on the lip Ulcerated fixed drug eruption, oral mucosa Fixed drug eruption: glans penis
Non-pigmenting fixed drug eruption
Often symmetrical lesions
Resolves without post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
Associated with piroxicam and pseudoephedrine.
Generalised fixed drug eruption
Presents with numerous lesions
Lesions may be targetoid resembling erythema multiforme.
Generalised bullous fixed drug eruption
Recurrent episodes with onset within 24 hours of drug exposure
Numerous large blisters and erosions with normal skin between typically affecting <10% of the skin surface
Relative sparing of mucosal surfaces
Lesions are not targetoid
Fever, malaise and arthralgia may be associated
Resolves with post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.
What are the complications of fixed drug eruption?
Blisters and erosions
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
Cross-reaction with other medications
Generalised bullous fixed drug eruption can be complicated by fluid loss, electrolyte imbalance, and secondary infection.
How is fixed drug eruption diagnosed?
Fixed drug eruption should be considered on history and examination but may be difficult on the first occasion. On subsequent episodes, a detailed history of oral intake in the preceding 24 hours may identify the culprit.
Investigations may include:
Skin biopsy — shows an interface dermatitis in an early lesion with scattered apoptotic keratinocytes, vacuolar degeneration, dermal oedema, and a superficial perivascular lympho-eosinophilic infiltrate. Blisters are subepidermal if present. A late lesion shows upper dermal melanophages.
Oral challenge test — with a low dose of the suspected drug although there is typically a refractory period during which time the patch will not flare. This is contraindicated in patients with generalised bullous fixed drug eruption.
What is the differential diagnosis for fixed drug eruption?
First episode of single or few lesions — bullous insect bite reaction, bullous pemphigoid and other autoimmune bullous disorders
Targetoid lesions — erythema multiforme
Multiple bullous lesions — Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis
Oral lesions — herpes simplex, aphthous ulcer, oral autoimmune blistering diseases
What is the treatment for fixed drug eruption?
Discontinuation of suspected medication
Avoiding implicated medication indefinitely
Topical steroids/systemic corticosteroids
Generalised bullous fixed drug eruption requires intensive care or burns unit
What is the outcome for fixed drug eruption?
Fixed drug eruption is generally a benign self-resolving eruption that recurs on re-exposure, leaving post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation. Subsequent flares can be more severe.
Generalised bullous fixed drug eruption can be life-threatening, and has been reported to have a 20% mortality rate.
Appendix: list of some causes of fixed drug eruption
Antibiotics — co-trimoxazole, tetracyclines, penicillins, metronidazole, rifampicin, erythromycin, quinolones, dapsone
Antimalarials — quinine
Antifungals — systemic azoles eg, fluconazole [see Oral antifungal medication]
Analgesics/anti-inflammatories
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) — aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam, mefenamic acid
Sedatives and anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines
Calcium-channel blockers
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Cetirizine, omeprazole, pseudoephedrine, sulphasalazine, vaccinations
Complimentary medicines
Including traditional herbal medications and supplements
Asparagus, cashew nuts, kiwi fruit, lentil, palm wine, peanut, propolis, quinine (tonic water), seafood, strawberry, tartrazine (yellow rice, cheese crisps)
Adern-Jones MR, Lee HY. Benign cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology, 9th edn. Wiley Blackwell, 2016: pp118.11–14.
Byrd RC, Mournighan KJ, Baca-Atlas M, Helton MR, Sun NZ, Siegel MB. Generalized bullous fixed-drug eruption secondary to the influenza vaccine. JAAD Case Rep. 2018;4(9):953–5. doi:10.1016/j.jdcr.2018.07.013. PubMed Central
Fukushima S, Kidou M, Ihn H. Fixed food eruption caused by cashew nut. Allergol Int. 2008;57(3):285–7. doi:10.2332/allergolint.C-07-58. Journal
Mitre V, Applebaum DS, Albahrani Y, Hsu S. Generalized bullous fixed drug eruption imitating toxic epidermal necrolysis: a case report and literature review. Dermatol Online J. 2017;23(7):13030/qt25v009gs. Journal
Mizukawa Y, Shiohara T. Trauma-localized fixed drug eruption: involvement of burn scars, insect bites and venipuncture sites. Dermatology. 2002;205(2):159–61. doi:10.1159/000063892. PubMed
Mizukawa Y, Yamazaki Y, Teraki Y, et al. Direct evidence for interferon-gamma production by effector-memory-type intraepidermal T cells residing at an effector site of immunopathology in fixed drug eruption. Am J Pathol. 2002;161(4):1337–47. doi:10.1016/s0002-9440(10)64410-0. Journal
Özkaya E. Oral mucosal fixed drug eruption: characteristics and differential diagnosis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69(2):e51–8. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2012.08.019. PubMed
Patel S, John AM, Handler MZ, Schwartz RA. Fixed drug eruptions: an update, emphasizing the potentially lethal generalized bullous fixed drug eruption. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2020;21(3):393-9. doi:10.1007/s40257-020-00505-3. PubMed
Tan C, Zhu WY. Chinese herbal medicine: a neglected offender for fixed drug eruptions. Eur J Dermatol. 2010;20(3):397–9. doi:10.1684/ejd.2010.0947. PubMed
Blistering skin conditions
Bullous drug eruptions
Cutaneous adverse reactions to antibiotics
Target and targetoid lesions
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Understanding drug eruptions — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Fixed drug eruptions — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Folliculitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/folliculitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Folliculitis — extra information
Inflammation of hair follicle
Infections, Follicular disorder
1B74.Z, 1B74.Y, 1B75, EK5Y, ED81.Y, EH67.5, 1F2D.1, 1G07.0, 1B74.0, ED9Y, 1C62.1
13600006, 707220001, 399008001, 123687007, 240894003, 123688002, 53651004, 399324997, 428172002, 267812007, 721268005, 23838009, 238493000, 9115004, 402921005, 95333004
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated by Dr Oakley and Clare Morrison, Copy Editor. April 2014.
Folliculitis due to infection
Folliculitis due to irritation from regrowing hairs
Folliculitis due to immunosuppression
Folliculitis due to drugs
Folliculitis due to inflammatory skin diseases
Buttock folliculitis
What is folliculitis?
Folliculitis means an inflamed hair follicle due to any cause. The result is a tender red spot, often with a surface pustule.
Folliculitis may be superficial or deep. It can affect anywhere there are hairs, including chest, back, buttocks, arms, and legs. Acne and its variants are also types of folliculitis.
Superficial bacterial folliculitis  Superficial bacterial folliculitis
What causes folliculitis?
Folliculitis can be due to infection, occlusion (blockage), irritation and various skin diseases.
Folliculitis due to infection
Swabs should be taken from the pustules for cytology and culture in the laboratory to determine if folliculitis is due to an infection.
Bacterial folliculitis is commonly due to Staphylococcus aureus. If the infection involves the deep part of the follicle, it results in a painful boil. Recommended treatment includes careful hygiene, antiseptic cleanser or cream, antibiotic ointment, or oral antibiotics.
Spa pool folliculitis is due to infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which thrives in warm water. Gram-negative folliculitis is a pustular facial eruption also due to infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa or other similar organisms. When it appears, it usually follows tetracycline treatment of acne but is quite rare.
The most common yeast to cause a folliculitis is Pityrosporum ovale, also known as Malassezia. Malassezia folliculitis (pityrosporum folliculitis) is an itchy acne-like condition usually affecting the upper trunk of a young adult. Treatment includes avoiding moisturisers, stopping any antibiotics and using topical antifungal or oral antifungal medication for several weeks.
Candida albicans can also provoke a folliculitis in skin folds (intertrigo) or the beard area. It is treated with appropriate topical or oral antifungal agents.
Ringworm of the scalp (tinea capitis) usually results in scaling and hair loss, but sometimes results in folliculitis. In New Zealand, cat ringworm (Microsporum canis) is the commonest organism causing scalp fungal infection. Other fungi such as Trichophyton tonsurans are increasingly reported. Treatment is with an oral antifungal agent for several months.
Folliculitis may be caused by the herpes simplex virus. This tends to be tender and resolves without treatment in around ten days. Severe recurrent attacks may be treated with aciclovir and other antiviral agents.
Herpes zoster (the cause of shingles) may present as folliculitis with painful pustules and crusted spots within a dermatome (an area of skin supplied by a single nerve). It is treated with high-dose aciclovir.
Molluscum contagiosum, common in young children, can present with follicular umbilicated papules, usually clustered in and around a body fold. Molluscum may provoke dermatitis.
Folliculitis on the face or scalp of older or immunosuppressed adults may be due to colonisation by hair follicle mites (demodex). This is known as demodicosis.
The human infestation, scabies, often provokes folliculitis, as well as non-follicular papules, vesicles and pustules.
Folliculitis due to irritation from regrowing hairs
Folliculitis may arise as hairs regrow after shaving, waxing, electrolysis, or plucking. Swabs taken from the pustules are sterile — there is no growth of bacteria or other organisms. In the beard area irritant folliculitis is known as pseudofolliculitis barbae (or folliculitis barbae if associated with an infection).
Paraffin-based ointments, moisturisers, and adhesive plasters may all result in a sterile folliculitis. If a moisturiser is needed, choose an oil-free product, as it is less likely to cause occlusion.
Overuse of topical steroids may produce a folliculitis. Perioral dermatitis is a facial folliculitis provoked by moisturisers and topical steroids. Perioral dermatitis is treated with tetracycline antibiotics for six weeks or so.
Folliculitis due to immunosuppression
Eosinophilic folliculitis is a specific type of folliculitis that may arise in some immune-suppressed individuals such as those infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or those who have cancer.
Folliculitis due to drugs
Folliculitis may be due to drugs, particularly corticosteroids (steroid acne), androgens (male hormones), adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), lithium, isoniazid (INH), phenytoin and B-complex vitamins. Treatment with protein kinase inhibitors (epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors) and targeted therapy for metastatic melanoma (vemurafenib, dabrafenib) nearly always results in folliculitis.
Folliculitis due to inflammatory skin diseases
Certain uncommon inflammatory skin diseases may cause permanent hair loss and scarring because of deep-seated sterile folliculitis. These include:
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Folliculitis decalvans
Folliculitis keloidalis.
Treatment depends on the underlying condition and its severity. A skin biopsy is often necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Acne and acne-like (acneform) disorders are also forms of folliculitis. These include:
The follicular occlusion syndrome refers to:
Hidradenitis suppurativa (acne inversa)
Acne conglobata (a severe form of nodulocystic acne)
Dissecting cellulitis (perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens)
Treatment of the acne variants may include topical therapy as well as long courses of tetracycline antibiotics, isotretinoin (vitamin-A derivative) and, in women, antiandrogenic therapy.
Buttock folliculitis
Folliculitis affecting the buttocks is quite common in males and females.
Acute buttock folliculitis is usually bacterial in origin (like boils), resulting in red painful papules and pustules. It clears with antibiotics.
Chronic buttock folliculitis does not often cause significant symptoms but it can be very persistent. Although antiseptics, topical acne treatments, peeling agents such as alpha-hydroxy acids, long courses of oral antibiotics and isotretinoin can help buttock folliculitis, they are not always effective. Hair removal might be worth trying if the affected area is hairy. As regrowth of hair can make it worse, permanent hair reduction by laser or intense pulsed light (IPL) is best.
Durdu M, Ilkit M. First step in the differential diagnosis of folliculitis: cytology. Crit Rev Microbiol 2013; 39: 9–25. DOI: 10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051. PubMed
Furunculosis (boils)
Gram negative folliculitis
Spa pool folliculitis
Pseudofolliculitis barbae (shaving bumps)
Pityrosporum folliculitis
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis of infancy
Folliculitis decalvans
Bacterial skin infections
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Patient information: folliculitis (the basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Folliculitis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Folliculitis Barbae]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/folliculitis-barbae]
Folliculitis barbae: Causes, Management, and More - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Folliculitis barbae — extra information
Sycosis barbae, Razor bumps, Shaving rash, Pili incarnati
1B75.4, ED9Y, 1B74.0
156410002, 399205006, 238391002
Author(s): Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Updated: Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, United Kingdom, July 2016; Casey P Schukow, Medical Student, Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine, United States of America, February 2022.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is folliculitis barbae?
Folliculitis barbae is an itchy and sometimes tender papulopustular eruption of hair follicles in skin areas prone to shaving, such as the beard-line in men. It also occurs in women who shave their legs and bikini area.
Deep-seated folliculitis barbae is called sycosis barbae and leads to scarring and areas of permanent hair loss.
Folliculitis barbae presents similarly to pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB), which is a papulopustular foreign body reaction towards curved hair-follicles that penetrate the perifollicular epidermis as they grow out of the skin (ingrown hairs). PFB presents more frequently in post-shaven hair-bearing areas of persons with more curly and coarse hair, as seen in African Americans.
Both conditions may coexist.
Folliculitis barbae on the neck Deeper tender lesions in sycosis barbae Folliculitis barbae on the chin
Who gets folliculitis barbae?
Folliculitis barbae most commonly affects recently shaved hair-bearing areas in men (such as the beard-line) of lighter skin types. Folliculitis may also develop after laser hair removal. However, it may also present in individuals who do not shave.
What causes folliculitis barbae?
Reinfection by S. aureus after successful treatment may suggest persistent colonization of S. aureus within the nasal cavity or on previously used shaving equipment, such as razors.
What are the clinical features of folliculitis barbae?
Itchy, tender, papulopustular eruption surrounding hair follicles in hair-bearing skin areas (such as the beard-line, neck, axilla, and groin)
Frequently arises after shaving
Lesions may discharge pus or serous fluid
If the colonization of S. aureus seeds deeper in the skin, it may induce sycosis barbae, which presents as persistent sinus tracts, abscesses, and inflammation deep between hair follicles.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Curlier and coarser hairs of persons with darker skin types (such as African Americans) are more likely to penetrate perifollicular epidermis, causing PFB.
While PFB and folliculitis barbae may co-present in darker skin individuals, finer and straighter hairs in persons with lighter skin types are less likely to cause PFB.
What are the complications of folliculitis barbae?
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
Scarring, hypertrophic scarring, and keloid formation
How is folliculitis barbae diagnosed?
Folliculitis barbae is often a clinical diagnosis and may be aided by dermoscopy.
What is the differential diagnosis for folliculitis barbae?
Pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB)
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides
What is the treatment for folliculitis barbae?
Uncomplicated folliculitis barbae due to S. aureus should respond within 1–2 weeks of treatment with topical antibacterials.
Encourage use of disposable razors or cleaning electric shavers with alcohol based antiseptic solution regularly to prevent S. aureus colonization of the grooming tool.
Limited folliculitis barbae may be managed with topical antistaphylococcal antibiotics, such as clindamycin, mupirocin, and fusidic acid.
More wide-spread or refractory folliculitis barbae may require oral antistaphylococcal antibiotics, such as flucloxacillin or doxycycline
Nasal staphylococcal carriage may be eradicated by chlorhexidine/neomycin cream or mupirocin in recurrent or recalcitrant disease.
Viral and fungal aetiologies may require appropriate antiviral (such as valaciclovir) and antifungal (such as fluconazole) therapies.
Topical hydrocortisone cream may be used to help reduce inflammation and itching.
Photodynamic therapy has limited supporting evidence.
What is the outcome for folliculitis barbae?
Diernaes JE, Bygum A. Successful treatment of recalcitrant folliculitis barbae and pseudofolliculitis barbae with photodynamic therapy. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2013;10(4):651–3. doi:10.1016/j.pdpdt.2013.08.003. Journal
Löhrer R, Rübben  A. Folliculitis barbae in herpes simplex infection. Dermatologist. 2004:55(1);74–6. doi:10.1007/s00105-003-0670-7. Journal
Malveira MIB, Pascoal G, Gamonal SBL, Castañon MCMN. Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides: challenging clinical, histopathological and immunohistochemical diagnosis. An Bras Dermatol. 2017;92(5 Suppl 1):73-75. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20175634. Journal
Ogunbiyi A. Pseudofolliculitis barbae; current treatment options. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2019;12:241–7. Published 2019 Apr 16. doi:10.2147/CCID.S149250. Journal
Schuler A, Veenstra J, Tisack A. Folliculitis Induced by Laser Hair Removal: Proposed Mechanism and Treatment. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2020;13(5):34–36. Journal
Süss K, Vennewald I, Seebacher C. Case report. Folliculitis barbae caused by Candida albicans. Mycoses. 1999;42(11-12):683–5. doi:10.1046/j.1439-0507.1999.00531.x. Journal
Bacterial folliculitis
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
Facial skin problems
Folliculitis barbae — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Folliculitis Decalvans]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/folliculitis-decalvans]
Folliculitis decalvans
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Folliculitis decalvans
Folliculitis decalvans — extra information
Tufted hair folliculitis, Folliculitis depilans
Folliculitis decalvans
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated: Dr Maanasa Bandla, Intern, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist, Christchurch, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. August 2021. Minor update November 2025.
Differential diagnoses
What is folliculitis decalvans?
Folliculitis decalvans is a chronic, neutrophilic inflammation that results in scarring hair loss. Tufted hair folliculitis is probably a subset of folliculitis decalvans although tufting can be seen in other forms of cicatricial alopecia as well.
Folliculitis decalvans  Folliculitis decalvans
Who gets folliculitis decalvans?
Folliculitis decalvans usually presents in the 4th and 5th decades, with a male predominance. Children are not affected.
There are probably no racial differences in prevalence, although it has been claimed to be more common in African-American women.
What causes folliculitis decalvans?
Folliculitis decalvans is considered to be the result of an abnormal immune response to Staphylococcus aureus, although this is not yet proven.
What are the clinical features of folliculitis decalvans?
Folliculitis decalvans typically affects the scalp, often around the crown, but may affect the beard area, axillae, limbs, and pubic hair. The characteristic clinical features include:
Irregular, atrophic white patches of scarring and hair loss — solitary or multiple
Induration of the scalp
Follicular pustules and perifollicular crusts at the patch periphery
Follicular hyperkeratosis, scale, and erosions
Tufting — multiple hair shafts emerge from a single hair follicle, resulting in a ‘doll’s hair’ appearance
Mild itch, discomfort, or pain.
Perifollicular crusting and scale Tufted hairs and perifollicular crusting Tufted hairs and perifollicular erythema
Dermoscopy of folliculitis decalvans
Perifollicular erythema and scale
Scattered follicular pustules
What are the complications of folliculitis decalvans?
Permanent progressive hair loss
Psychological effects of hair loss
Squamous cell carcinoma
How is folliculitis decalvans diagnosed?
Folliculitis decalvans is a clinical diagnosis confirmed on bacteriology/mycology and histology if required.
Skin biopsy of an early lesion shows a neutrophilic infiltrate dilating the infundibulum of the hair follicle. The follicle in later lesions has ruptured resulting in perifollicular scarring and mixed inflammatory infiltrate including foreign body giant cells.
What is the differential diagnosis for folliculitis decalvans?
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Other causes of cicatricial alopecia including discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, and folliculitis keloidalis
What is the treatment for folliculitis decalvans?
Topical antiseptics and shampoos — although little evidence for efficacy
Topical anti-inflammatory agents
Topical and intralesional steroids
Topical such as fusidic acid
Oral tetracyclines, azithromycin, rifampicin in combination with clindamycin
Other systemic agents (off-label)
Hydroxychloroquine in combination with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole)
Oral isotretinoin, dapsone, tacrolimus, apremilast
Intravenous immunoglobulin, tumour necrosis factor inhibitors (eg, adalimumab)
Photodynamic therapy
Surgery for permanent hair loss if in remission
What is the outcome for folliculitis decalvans?
Folliculitis decalvans usually follows a chronic fluctuating course of exacerbations and remissions over many years. It is not clear that treatment influences the long-term prognosis despite successfully reducing inflammation in the short-term. Early diagnosis and treatment are important but permanent hair loss is to be expected.
Brooke RC, Griffiths CE. Folliculitis decalvans. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2001;26(1):120–2. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2230.2001.00746.x. Journal
Doche, I., Sotto, M. N., Hordinsky, et al. (2025). Hydroxychloroquine may be beneficial as an adjuvant therapy for folliculitis decalvans: a 5-year retrospective study with 49 patients. Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, 50(2), 404–407. doi:10.1093/ced/llae394. Journal
Fässler M, Radonjic-Hoesli S, Feldmeyer L, et al. Successful treatment of refractory folliculitis decalvans with apremilast. JAAD Case Rep. 2020;6(10):1079–81. doi:10.1016/j.jdcr.2020.08.019. PubMed Central
Otberg N, Kang H, Alzolibani AA, Shapiro J. Folliculitis decalvans. Dermatol Ther. 2008;21(4):238–44. doi:10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x. PubMed
Rambhia PH, Conic RRZ, Murad A, Atanaskova-Mesinkovska N, Piliang M, Bergfeld W. Updates in therapeutics for folliculitis decalvans: a systematic review with evidence-based analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(3):794–801.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.07.050. Journal
Senatore S, Maglie R, Maio V, Montefusco F, Antiga E. Folliculitis decalvans with exclusive beard involvement. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2021;87(4):569–71. doi:10.25259/IJDVL_694_20. Journal
Tietze JK, Heppt MV, von Preußen A, et al. Oral isotretinoin as the most effective treatment in folliculitis decalvans: a retrospective comparison of different treatment regimens in 28 patients. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(9):1816–21. doi:10.1111/jdv.13052. PubMed
Waśkiel-Burnat A, Starace M, Iorizzo M, et al. Management of folliculitis decalvans: The EADV task force on hair diseases position statement. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2025;39(8):1385-1394. doi:10.1111/jdv.20687. Journal
Yang A, Hannaford R, Kossard S. Folliculitis decalvans-like pustular plaques on the limbs sparing the scalp. Australas J Dermatol. 2020;61(1):54–6. doi:10.1111/ajd.13178. PubMed
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia
Diagnosis of scalp rashes
Folliculitis keloidalis
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Cicatricial Alopecia Research Foundation
Folliculitis decalvans — British Association of Dermatologists
Tufted hair folliculitis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Food Additives And E Numbers]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/food-additives-and-e-numbers]
Food Additives and E Numbers — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Food additives and E numbers
Food additives and E numbers — extra information
Food additives and E numbers
Author(s): Dr Phyo Zaw Aung, Dermatology Trainee, Bangkok, Thailand; Dr Libby Whittaker, Staff Medical Writer, DermNet (2023)
Previous contributors: Hon. Assoc. Prof. Marius Rademaker, Dermatologist (2003)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Food additive hypersensitivity
E numbers for preservatives
E numbers for antioxidants
E numbers for sweeteners
E numbers for emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E numbers for other food additives
Food additives without E numbers
What are food additives?
Food additives are chemical substances added to food to maintain its quality (preservatives), nutrition value, taste (flavouring agents), and appearance (colouring agents).
Sources of food additives can be:
Natural — eg, red colour from beetroots, purple colour from grape skins (anthocyanins)
Synthetic manufacture of:
Products not found in nature (eg, aspartame, an alternative to sugar)
Many naturally found additives (eg, ascorbic acid), as synthetic production is often less expensive.
The safety of food additives is assessed by agencies such as Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ), the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in the European Union (EU), or the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Food additive hypersensitivity
Adverse reactions to food additives (hypersensitivity) can occur via immunologic or non-immunologic mechanisms. Non-immunologic reactions are sometimes referred to as ‘food intolerances’.
Food additives associated with adverse reactions include, but are not limited to:
Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA)
The prevalence of adverse reactions to food additives in the general population is low, estimated at ~1–2% in children and 1% in adults. It appears to be more common in atopic children (2–7%).
Reactions vary from mild to severe, and can involve cutaneous and non-cutaneous symptoms.
Cutaneous symptoms may include flushing, pruritus, rash, urticaria, and angioedema. Benzoates and flavourings have been implicated in the cause of orofacial granulomatosis.
Non-cutaneous symptoms may include rhinorrhoea, cough, nausea and vomiting, reflux or ‘heartburn’, abdominal cramping, diarrhoea or constipation, and anaphylactic shock.
Sometimes food additive reactions can contribute to exacerbations of existing disease, such as a flare-up of atopic dermatitis (eczema) or asthma.
A history suggestive of potential food additive hypersensitivity includes:
Adverse reactions to a number of unrelated foods
Exacerbation of a pre-existing condition (eg, eczema) without another clear cause.
Diagnostic tools for adverse reactions to food additives include:
Blood tests — Immunoglobulin E (IgE) tests to specific food additives such as carmine, mannitol, saffron, and vegetable gum
Oral food challenges
Avoidance of additives identified is mainstay treatment.
Checking ingedient lists on food labels, as well as medications and cosmetics is recommended.
Specific treatment depends on the reaction observed. Treatment may include oral antihistamines, topical steroids, nasal sprays, or in the case of anaphylaxis, adrenaline (epinephrine). A medical alert bracelet for those with severe and anaphylactic reactions is also recommended.
What are food additive E numbers?
Foods sold throughout the EU have had full ingredient labelling since the mid-1980s. These include standard codes (E numbers) that accurately describe additives. These numbers are also used in other regions such as Australia and New Zealand, without the E (‘Europe’).
E100s: generally food colours.
E200s: mainly preservatives and acids.
E300s: mainly antioxidants and acid regulators.
E400s: include emulsifiers, stabilisers, and thickeners.
E500s: include anti-caking agents and acidity regulators.
E600s: mainly flavour enhancers.
E900s: include sweeteners, glazing agents, foaming agents, and gases.
E1000s: other additives.
Commonly used food additives are included in Tables 1-6 below. These tables are not complete or exhaustive and may undergo change as additives are re-classified.
A full list of additives in the EU is published by the Food Standards Agency (United Kingdom). A similar list for Australia and New Zealand is published by the New Zealand Food Safety Association.
Table 1. Colouring agents (E100s)
**E number****Name****Description****Examples of use**E100
Curcumin- Naturally occurring orange/yellow colour
- Extracted from the spice turmeric
- Used in pastries, confectionery, sauces, and soups
Riboflavin or lactoflavin (Vitamin B2)- Naturally occurring B-group vitamin
- Usually obtained from yeast or produced synthetically
- Enrichment and fortification of food
- Added to processed cheese as yellow/orange colour
E102Tartrazine- Widely used yellow/orange colour
- Found in soft drinks, cakes, biscuits, puddings, meat products, sauces, tinned and packet convenience foods and confectionery
E104Quinoline Yellow- A synthetic coal tar dye, greenish yellow in colour
- Used with other yellow colours, especially in smoked fish
E110Sunset Yellow FCF; Orange Yellow S- A synthetic coal tar dye, yellow in colour, used with E102
- Found in soft drinks, cakes, biscuits, puddings, meat products, sauces, tinned and packet convenience foods and confectionery
E120Cochineal; Carminic acid; Carmines- Natural red colour obtained from egg yolk and dried insects
- Can be manufactured
- Red colour in foods
E122Azorubine; Carmoisine- A synthetic coal tar dye, red/purple in colour
- Often added to raspberry and chocolate flavoured desserts, marzipan, jam, cherryade, bottled sauce, and breaded products
E123Amaranth- A synthetic coal tar dye, red in colour
- Sometimes used in gravy mixes, meat patties, and blackcurrant drinks
E124Ponceau 4R; Cochineal Red A- A synthetic coal tar dye, red in colour
- Often used to restore red colour to tinned strawberries
Also added to strawberry jam, jelly and ice cream, tomato soup, savoury rice, cheesecake mix, and some meat products
E127Erythrosine- A synthetic coal tar dye, red in colour
- Rich in mineral iodine
- Regular component of glace cherries, peach melba yogurt, vacuum-packed ham and pork, tinned strawberries, and certain flavours of chips and potato-based snacks
E128Red 2G- A synthetic coal tar dye, red in colour
- Now banned in many countries including the EU and USA
E129Allura Red AC- Colouring agent
- Used in drinks, baked goods, meat products, and sweets
E131Patent Blue V- Colouring agent
- Used in some meat products
E132lndigotine; Indigo Carmine- A synthetic coal tar dye, blue in colour
- Added to gravy mix and certain meat products
E133Brilliant Blue FCF- A synthetic coal tar dye, blue in colour
- Often mixed with E102 to make green
- Bacon flavoured snacks
E140Chlorophyll and chlorophyllins- Naturally occurring green pigment found plant leaves and stems
- Added to green vegetables to enhance their colour
E141Copper complexes of chlorophyll and chlorophyllins- A more stable colour obtained by a reaction between copper and manufactured chlorophyll
- Used to heighten the green colour of products such as cucumber relish
E142Green S- A synthetic coal tar dye, green in colour
- Used to restore the expected green colour to tinned peas
- Also added to asparagus soup, lemon or lime drinks and jellies, and mint sauce
E150aPlain caramel- Commonly used brown colour and flavouring agent made from the caramelisation or burning of sugar by heat or chemicals
- No ammonium or sulphite reactants
- Used in soft drinks, gravy mix, brown bread, cakes, biscuits, malt vinegar, marmalade, and beef products
E150bCaustic sulphite caramel- Colouring agent
- With sulphite reactant, but no ammonium
- Used in tea, whiskey, and brandy
E150cAmmonia caramel- Colouring agent
- With ammonium reactant, but no sulphite
- Used to colour soy sauce and beer
E150dSulphite ammonia caramel- Colouring agent
- With both sulphite and ammonia reactants
- Widely used for soft drinks
E151Brilliant Black BN; Black PN- A synthetic coal tar dye, black in colour
- Used to darken fruit sauces
E153Vegetable carbon- Natural black colour obtained from burnt plant material, now often manufactured
- Added to concentrated fruit juices, preserves, and jellies
E155Brown HT- A synthetic coal tar dye, brown in colour
E160 a - eCarotenoids- Plant pigments derived from carrots, tomatoes, apricots, oranges, rosehip and green leafy vegetables
- Now mostly manufactured
- Provide a range of colours from yellow to red
E160aAlpha-, beta, and gamma-carotenes- Beta-carotene is a well-known substance that is converted by the body to Vitamin A
- Added to biscuits, cakes, margarine, creamed rice, cheese products, and certain soups
E160bAnnatto- Orange/peach pigment naturally present in butter and cheese
- Used to give creamy colour to creamed rice, coffee creamer, pastry, cheese, and cheese products
E160cPaprika extract; Capsanthian; Capsorubin- Colouring agent (red)
- Can be used to add colour and flavour to various food products
E160dLycopene- Colouring agent (red)
- May be used in processed foods, beverages, and ketchup
E160eBeta-apo-8'-carotenal (C30); apocarotenal- Colouring agent (orange/red)
- Sometimes used in processed cheese
E161bLutein- Colouring agent (yellow/orange)
- Has been used as a chicken feed additive to promote yellow colouring of egg yolks
E161gCanthaxanthin- Colouring agent (reddish/orange)
- May be present in food and self-tanning products
E162Betanin (Beetroot Red)- Naturally occurring red/purple colour in beetroots
- May be added to oxtail soup
E163Anthocyanins- Plant pigments with colours ranging from red to blue
- Naturally present in red cabbage and grapes
- Used in producing purple-colored beverages, confectionaries, and jams
E170Calcium carbonate (chalk)- Naturally occurring mineral
- Various functions including acid regulator, firming agent, releasing agent, and nutrient
- Added to white flour as a calcium supplement to replace the loss due to refining
- Frequently an ingredient in bread and baked products
E171Titanium dioxide- Colouring agent
- Use no longer permitted in the EU and in Northern Ireland as of Feb 2022
E172Iron oxides and hydroxides- Naturally occurring mineral
- Added to fortify food
- Added to flour and breakfast cereals
E173Aluminium- Colouring agent (silver/grey)
- Surface coating (eg, for cake decoration or confectionary)
E174Silver- Colouring agent
- May be used for silver surface coating
E175Gold- Colouring agent
- May be used for gold surface coating
E180Lithol rubine BK- Colouring agent (red)
- Used for colouring cheese rind
E numbers for preservatives
Table 2. Preservatives (mainly E200s)
E numberNameDescriptionExamples of useE200Sorbic acid- Naturally occurring in some fruit but generally manufactured synthetically for use as a food preservative
- Commonly added to soft drinks, cheese spread, frozen pizza, and cakes
E202Potassium sorbate- Salt of sorbic acid
- Used to preserve glace cherries
E210Benzoic acid- Occurs naturally in cherry bark, raspberries, tea, anise, and cassia bark, but largely prepared synthetically for commercial use
- Acts as a preservative and antioxidant most frequently in fruit products, soft drinks, pickled produce, and salad dressings
E211Sodium benzoate- Salt of benzoic acid
Potassium benzoate- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E213Calcium benzoate- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E214Ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate- Preservative
- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E215Sodium ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate- Preservative
- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E218Methyl p-hydroxybenzoate- Preservative
- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E219Sodium methyl p-hydroxybenzoate- Preservative
- Salt of benzoic acid
- As per benzoic acid (E210)
E220Sulfur dioxide- Gas prepared chemically for use as a food preservative, flour improver, bleaching agent, and Vitamin C stabiliser
- Found in carbonated drinks, marmalade, glace cherries, mixed peel, cakes, fruit based products, and meat products
E221Sodium sulphite- Preservative
- May be used to prevent discolouration in dried fruit
E222Sodium hydrogen sulphite- Synthetic preservative and bleaching agent
- Often added to wine and beer
E223Sodium metabisulphite- Synthetic preservative
- Added to sausages and some bottled sauces
E224Potassium metabisulphite- Preservative
- Sometimes used to preserve beer, wine, and other fermented beverages
E226Calcium sulphite- Preservative
- Banned in Australia
E227Calcium hydrogen sulphite- Preservative
- May be used in canned fruit and beer products
E228Potassium hydrogen sulphite- Preservative
- May be used in alcoholic beverages
E234Nisin- Preservative
- Cheese and dairy products
E235Natamycin- Preservative
- Cheese and sausages
E239Hexamethylene tetramine- Preservative
- Cheese and fish products
E242Dimethyl dicarbonate- Preservative
E243Ethyl lauroyl arginate- Preservative
- Heat‐treated meat products
E249Potassium nitrite- Naturally occurring mineral used as a preservative and colour fixative
- Used in cooked meats, sausages, and cured meats
E250Sodium nitrite- Derived from sodium nitrate by chemical or bacterial action
- Acts as a preservative and colour fixative
- Added to cooked and cured meats, bacon, and pork sausages
E251Sodium nitrate- Naturally occurring mineral, usually manufactured synthetically for use as a food preservative and colour fixative
- In cooked meats, bacon, ham, and cheese
E252Potassium nitrate- Naturally occurring but more usually produced artificially from animal waste and vegetable material
- One of the oldest and most effective preservatives for meat
- Also acts as a curing agent
- Found in cured and cooked meats, and sausages
E280Propionic acid- Fatty acid produced by animals in the process of digestion, but generally manufactured synthetically
- Added to baked goods
- Functions as a preservative
E281Sodium propionate- Salt of propionic acid
- Added to baked goods
E282Calcium propionate- Salt of propionic acid
- Found naturally in Swiss cheese
- Added to baked goods
E283Potassium propionate- Salt of propionic acid
- Added to baked goods
E284Boric acid- Preservative and acidity regulator
- Sometimes used in meat, fish, and dairy products
- Other uses include antiseptic and insecticide
E285Sodium tetraborate; borax- Preservative
- Sodium salt of boric acid (see E284)
- Sometimes used as caviar preservative
- Banned in some countries including the United States
E1105Lysozyme- Preservative
- Natural enzyme found in tears, saliva, blood, sweat, and breast milk
- Commercially purified from egg whites
- Infant nutrition products
E numbers for antioxidants
Table 3. Antioxidants (mainly E300s)
**E number****Name****Description****Examples of use**E300Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C)- Occurs naturally in fruit and vegetables but is synthesised biologically
- Acts as a preservative, anti-oxidant, meat colour fixative, and flour improver
- Found in fruit juices, bread, baked products, powdered mashed potatoes, and other products
E301Sodium ascorbate- Salt of ascorbic acid
- Added to cured meats
E302Calcium ascorbate- Salt of ascorbic acid
- Similar function to ascorbic acid (E300)
E304Fatty acid esters of ascorbic acid- Salt of ascorbic acid
- Used in sausage and cured meats
E306Tocopherol (Vitamin E)- Obtained from soya bean oil, wheatgerm, rice germ, cottonseed, maize, and green leaves
- Used as an antioxidant and nutrient
- Added to fats and oils
E307Alpha-tocopherol- Synthetic products of tocopherol with similar functions (see E306)
- Added to fats and oils
E308Gamma-tocopherol- Synthetic products of tocopherol with similar functions (see E306)
- Added to fats and oils
E309Delta-tocopherol- Synthetic products of tocopherol with similar functions (see E306)
- Added to fats and oils
E310Propyl gallate- Synthetically prepared antioxidant
- Added to fats and oils
- Found in fried foods
- May give rise to a bitter taste
E315Erythorbic acid- Antioxidant
- Processed meat and fish products
E316Sodium erythorbate- Antioxidant
E319Tertiary-butyl hydroquinone (TBHQ)- Antioxidant
E320Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA)- Antioxidant manufactured synthetically for use alone or with E280, E310, or E330
- Often found in chips and other potato snacks, biscuits, pastry, bottled sauces, and fried foods
E321Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)- Synthetically prepared antioxidant
- Similar to butylated hydroxyanisole (E320)
E392Extracts of rosemary- Antioxidant
E5864-Hexylresorcinol- Antioxidant
- Shrimps and crustaceans
E numbers for sweeteners
Table 4. Sweeteners (E400s and E900s)
**E number****Name****Description****Examples of use**E420Sorbitol- Sugar alcohol produced from glucose
- Less quickly absorbed than sugar so often used as a sweetener
- Also used as a humectant and food colour diluent
- May have a laxative effect in large doses
- Widely used in diabetic confectionery, preserves, biscuits, cakes, and soft drinks
E421Mannitol- Sugar alcohol derived from mannose, but general manufactured from seaweed
- Acts as a sweetener, emulsifier, anti-caking agent, and thickener
- Used in confectionery and desserts
E950Acesulfame K- Sweetener
- Low-calorie sweetener used in various food and drinks
E951Aspartame- New artificial sweetener of protein origin
- Contains phenylalanine
- Artificial sweeteners, confectionery, ice cream, low calorie desserts, and soft drinks
E952Cyclamic acid and its Na and Ca salts- Artificial sweetener
E953lsomalt- Sweetener
- High temperature stability
- Used as a sweetener in heat-treated products eg, bakery products
E954Saccharin and its Na, K, and Ca salts- Calorie-free artificial sweetener
- Low calorie products, soft drinks, and confectionery
E955Sucralose- Sweetener
- Candy, breakfast bars, soft drinks, canned fruits
E957Thaumatin- Sweetener
- Natural plant protein
- May be used in beverages, dairy products, or chewing gum
E959Neohesperidine DC- Sweetener
- Derived from citrus
- Widely used in desserts, dairy products, confectionary, and beverages
E960Steviol glycoside- Sweetener
- Widely used in carbonated soft drinks, juice, tea, desserts, dairy products, confectionary, and other products
E961Neotame- Sweetener, similar to aspartame (E951)
- Widely used (see E951)
E962Salt of aspartame-acesulfame- Low-calorie sweetener
E964Polyglycitol syrup- Sweetener
E965Maltitol- Naturally occurring sugar in grapes and corn
- Confectionery, cakes, biscuits, puddings, desserts, soft drinks, convenience foods
E966Lactitol- Synthetic sweetener
- Derived from lactose
- Replacement bulk sweetener for low-calorie foods
E967Xylitol- Sweetener
- Widely used as sugar substitute eg, confectionary, sweet sauces, liqueurs, jams, desserts
E968Erythritol- Sweetener
- Made from carbohydrate fermentation
E969Advantame- Sweetener
- Tabletop sweetener, confectionary, bubblegum, flavoured drinks, and other products
E numbers for emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
Table 5. Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents (mainly E400s)
**E number****Name****Description****Examples of use**E322Lecithins- Type of fat or lipid compound found naturally in all living organisms, protective against cholesterol deposition
- Egg yolk is a rich source of lecithins, but commercially, most is obtained from soya beans
- Used as an antioxidant and emulsifier
- Found in chocolate and chocolate products, powdered milk, margarine, and potato snacks
E400Alginic acid- Emulsifier, stabiliser, gelling agent, and thickener extracted from brown seaweed
- Frequently added to ice cream, instant desserts, and puddings
E401Sodium alginate- Salt of alginic acid with similar functions (see E400)
- See E400 (alginic acid)
E402Potassium alginate- Salt of alginic acid with similar functions (see E400)
- See E400 (alginic acid)
E403Ammonium alginate- Salt of alginic acid with similar functions (see E400)
- See E400 (alginic acid)
E404Calcium alginate- Salt of alginic acid with similar functions (see E400)
- See E400 (alginic acid)
E405Propane-1,2-diol alginate; propylene glycol alginate (PGA)- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E406Agar- Naturally occurring gum extracted from seaweeds
- Not digested so acts a source of dietary fibre
- Also acts as a stabiliser and gelling agent
- Used in tinned ham, meat glazes, and in ice cream
E407Carrageenan (Irish moss)- Gum naturally present in red seaweed
- Used as an emulsifier, stabiliser, and gelling agent
- Found in ice cream
- Alternative to gelatin
E407aProcessed eucheuma seaweed- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E410Locust bean gum; carob gum- Natural extract from the Carob tree seed
- Added to ice cream, and soups
- Carob is a non-caffeine containing substitute for cocoa and chocolate
- Used in beverages, confectionery, and baked products
E412Guar gum (cluster bean gum)- Naturally occurring seed gum from a tree of the pea family
- Used as a thickener and stabiliser
- Added to bottled sauces, soup, ice cream, and frozen desserts
E413Tragacanth- Natural gum obtained from a tree of the pea family
- Used as a stabiliser, emulsifier, and thickener
- Used to prevent crystallisation of sugar
- Similar to E412 and in confectionery
E414Acacia gum; gum arabic- Similar to E413
E415Xanthan gum- Made from fermentation of carbohydrates by bacteria
- Used as an emulsifier, stabiliser, and thickener
- Added to ice cream and bottled sauces
E416Karaya gum- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E417Tara gum- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E418Gellan gum- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E425Konjac- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E426Soybean hemicellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E427Cassia gum- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E432Polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate; Polysorbate 20- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E433Polyoxyethylene sorbitan mono-oleate; Polysorbate 80- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E434Polyoxyethylene sorbitan monopalmitate; Polysorbate 40- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E435Polyoxyethylene sorbitan monostearate; Polysorbate 60- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
- Prepared from sorbitol (E420)
- Bread and baked products
E436Polyoxyethylene sorbitan tristearate; Polysorbate 65- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E440aPectin- Occurs naturally in fruits, roots, and stems of plants
- Used as a stabiliser and gelling agent
- Added to preserves, jellies, and mint sauce
E440bAmidated pectin- Chemically treated pectin used as an emulsifier and gelling agent
- Preserves and jellies
E442Ammonium phosphatide- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E444Sucrose acetate isobutyrate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E445Glycerol esters of wood rosins- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickeners, and gelling agent
E460Cellulose- Fibrous part of plant cell walls used as a bulking agent
- Used in high fibre bread and low-calorie products
E461Methyl cellulose- Derived from cellulose with similar properties
- Used in slimming foods
E462Ethyl cellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E463Hydroxypropyl cellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E464Hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E465Ethyl methyl cellulose- Derived from cellulose with similar properties
- Added to fruit cake and bottled sauces
E466Carboxymethyl cellulose- Derived from cellulose with similar properties
- Used in ice cream, cream products, and cheesecake mix
E468Crosslinked sodium carboxymethyl cellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E469Enzymatically hydrolysed carboxymethyl cellulose- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E470aSodium, potassium, and calcium salts of fatty acids- Synthetically manufactured emulsifiers, stabilisers, and anti-caking agents
- Crisps and potato snacks
E470bMagnesium salts of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E471Mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Normal products of fat digestion but are prepared synthetically
- Frequently added to powdered milk, packet soup, cake, crisps, potato snacks, bread, baked products, and margarine
E472aAcetic acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E472bLactic acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E472cCitric acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E472dTartaric acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E472eMono- and diacetyltartaric acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E472fMixed acetic and tartaric acid esters of mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E473Sucrose esters of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E474Sucroglycerides- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E475Polyglycerol esters of fatty acids- Synthetic product of E471 used as an emulsifier and stabiliser
- Puddings and packet cheesecakes
E476Polyglycerol polyricinoleate- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E477Propane-1,2-diol esters of fatty acids- Emulsifiers, stabilisers, thickeners, and gelling agents
E479bThermally oxidised soya bean oil interacted with mono- and diglycerides of fatty acids- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E481Sodium stearoyl-2-lactylate- Prepared synthetically from lactic acid
- Used as a stabiliser and emulsifier
E482Calcium stearoyl-2-lactylate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E483Stearyl tartrate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E491Sorbitan monostearate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E492Sorbitan tristearate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E493Sorbitan monolaurate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E494Sorbitan monooleate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E495Sorbitan monopalmitate- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E1103Invertase- Emulsifier, stabiliser, thickener, and gelling agent
E numbers for other food additives
Table 6. Other food additives
**E number****Name****Description****Examples of use**E260Acetic acid- Natural component of vinegar but generally manufactured from wood
- Used as a preservative, acid, or colour diluent
- Found in pickles, bottled sauces, and chutneys
E261Potassium acetate- Flavour agent, preservative, and acidity regulator
- Potassium salt of acetic acid (E260)
- Used as flavouring agent in snack foods such as potato chips (vinegar taste)
- Also used in potassium supplements
E262Sodium acetate- Flavouring agent, preservative, and acid
- Sodium salt of acetic acid (E260)
- Salt and vinegar chip flavouring, among other uses
E263Calcium acetate- Flavouring agent, preservative, and acid
- Calcium salt of acetic acid (E260)
E270Lactic acid- Produced by the fermentation of lactose (the sugar present in milk)
- Occurs naturally in soured milk and yoghurt
- Acts as a preservative, acid, flavour, and assists the action of antioxidants
- Widely used in salad dressings, cakes, biscuits, confectionery, and certain types of prepared meat dishes
E290Carbon dioxide- Gas present in air, but produced synthetically for food
- Adds the fizz to fizzy drinks (carbonation)
- Also used as a coolant, freezant, propellant, preservative, and packaging gas
E296Malic acid- Flavouring agent, acidity regulator, colour stabiliser
E297Fumaric acid- Prepared synthetically as an acid flavour
E325Sodium lactate- Preservative, acidity regulator, and bulking agent
E326Potassium lactate- Preservative
- Meat and poultry products
E327Calcium lactate- Firming agent, flavouring agent, thickener, stabiliser, antioxidant
- Used in fruit and vegetable processing
- May be used in calcium supplements
E330Citric acid; lemon salt- Acidity regulator, preservative
- Commonly used in canned foods, snacks, ice creams, soft drinks
E331Sodium citrates- Preservatives, flavouring agents, emulsifiers
- Sodium salt of citric acid (E330)
E332Potassium citrates- Acidity regulators, flavouring agents
- Potassium salt of citric acid (E330)
- As well as food additive, may be used to treat kidney stones
E333Calcium citrates- Preservatives, flavouring agents
- Calcium salt of citric acid (E330)
- As well as food additive, sometimes used in calcium supplements
E334Tartaric acid (L-(+))- Acidity regulator, flavouring agent, raising agent, stabiliser
- Sugar production, confectionary, winemaking
E335Sodium tartrates- Acidity regulators, stabilisers
- Sodium salts of tartaric acid (E334)
- Binding agent in jellies, margarine, and sausage casings
E336Potassium tartrates- Acidity regulators, stabilisers
- Potassium salts of tartaric acid (E334)
- Potassium bitartrate = cream of tartar
E337Sodium potassium tartrates- Acidity regulators, stabilisers
- Double salts of tartaric acid
E338Phosphoric acid- Acid, flavouring
E339Sodium phosphates- Acidity regulator, thickener, emulsifier
- Sodium salt of phosphoric acid (E338)
- Found in meat, cheese, and baked products
E340Potassium phosphates- Acidity regulator, raising agent, stabiliser
- Potassium salt of phosphoric acid (E338)
- As well as food additive, also used in some potassium supplements
E341Calcium phosphates- Anti-caking agent, emulsifier, stabiliser, acidity regulator
- Calcium salt of phosphoric acid (E338)
- Used to prevent lumps in powdered foods
- Also used in some nutritional supplements
E343Magnesium phosphates- Acidity regulator, anti-caking agent, stabiliser
- Found in salt substitutes
E350Sodium malate- Acidity regulator, flavouring agent
- Sodium salt of malic acid (E296)
E351Potassium malate- Acidity regulator, antioxidant, flavouring agent
- Potassium salt of malic acid (E296)
E352Calcium malate- Acidity regulator, flavouring agent, thickening agent
- Calcium salt of malic acid (E296)
E353Metatartaric acid- Acidity regulator
- Used in wine production
E354Calcium tartrate- Preservative and acidity regulator
- Calcium salt of tartaric acid (E334)
E355Adipic acid- Acidity regulator, flavouring and raising agent
- Naturally present in beets and sugar cane
- Used in baking powders, fizzy drinks, and drink mixes
E356Sodium adipate- Sodium salt of adipic acid
E357Potassium adipate- Potassium salt of adipic acid
E363Succinic acid- Acidity regulator, flavouring, fragrance
E380Triammonium citrate- Acid regulator, buffer, emulsifier
- Ammonium salt of citric acid
E385Calcium disodium ethylene diamine tetra-acetate; calcium disodium EDTA- Preservative, antioxidant
- Canned foods, soft drinks
E422Glycerol- Flavour enhancer, sweetener, colouring agent, preservative
- Widely used in baked goods and confectionary
E423Octenyl succinic acid modified gum arabic- Emulsifier
- Chemical modification of gum arabic
- Processed meat, cheeses, jam, snacks, chewing gum
E450Diphosphates- Acid regulators, emulsifiers
- Salts of sodium / potassium / calcium with phosphates
- Many different products
E451Triphosphates- Preservatives, emulsifiers, stabilisers
- Potassium and sodium triphosphates
- Many different products
E452Polyphosphates- Stabilisers, emulsifiers
- Polyphosphates of potassium, calcium, ammonium, sodium
- Many different products
E459Beta-cyclodextrin; betadex- Emulsifier, flavouring agent
- Dry mixes (eg, for baking, soups, flavoured coffee or tea), cereal, other processed products
E499Stigmasterol-rich plant sterols E500Sodium carbonate- Acidity regulator, anti-caking agent, raising agent, stabiliser
E501Potassium carbonate- Acidity regulator, stabiliser, raising agent
- Can be used in potassium supplements
E503Ammonium carbonate- Acidity regulator, stabiliser, leavening agent
- Flat-baked goods (eg, crackers, cookies)
E504Magnesium carbonate- Acidity regulator, colouring agent, anti-caking agent
- May have laxative effect in high concentrations
- Salts, icing sugar, dry mixes
- Dietary supplements (source of magnesium)
E507Hydrochloric acid- Acidity regulator
E508Potassium chloride- Flavouring agent, thickener
- Sodium-free salt alternative
E509Calcium chloride- Preservative, stabiliser, firming agent, anti-caking agent, acid regulator
- Various food products, also used in some calcium supplements
E511Magnesium chloride- Stabiliser, firming agent
- Tofu preparation from soy milk
E512Stannous chloride- Antioxidant, colour retention agent
- Canned and bottled foods
E513Sulphuric acid- Acidity regulator
- Beer preparation and dairy products
E514Sodium sulphate- Acidity regulator, anti-caking agent, stabiliser
- Sodium salt of sulphuric acid
- Beer, biscuits, confectionary, chewing gum
E515Potassium sulphate- Acid regulator, anti-caking agent
- Potassium salt of sulphuric acid
E516Calcium sulphate- Buffer, firming agent
- Calcium salt of sulphuric acid
- Soy products, tofu
E517Ammonium sulphate- Acidity regulator
- Ammonium salt of sulphuric acid
- Used in dough, baked products
E520Aluminium sulphate- Aluminium salt of sulphuric acid
E521Aluminium sodium sulphate- Acidity regulator, bleaching agent
- Flour, cheese, confectionary
E522Aluminium potassium sulphate- Acidity regulator, raising agent
E523Aluminium ammonium sulphate- Acidity regulator, stabiliser
E524Sodium hydroxide- Acidity regulator
- Baking, and chocolate, cocoa, fruit, and olive processing
E525Potassium hydroxide- Acidity regulator, stabiliser, thickening agent
E526Calcium hydroxide- Acidity regulator, preservative
- Vegetable processing
E527Ammonium hydroxide- Acidity regulator
E528Magnesium hydroxide- Anti-caking agent, acidity regulator
- Cheese, canned vegetables
E529Calcium oxide (quicklime)- Acidity regulator, raising agent
E530Magnesium oxide- Anti-caking agent, acidity regulator
- Manufacture of powdered goods (eg, milk powder)
- Also used for relief of heartburn / reflux
E535Sodium ferrocyanide- Anti-caking agent
- Added to table salt
E536Potassium ferrocyanide- Anti-caking agent
E538Calcium ferrocyanide- Anti-caking agent
E541Sodium aluminium phosphate- Synthetically prepared raising agent
- Self-raising flour
E551Silicon dioxide (Silica)- Derived from sand
- Used as an anti-caking agent
E552Calcium silicate- Salt of silicon dioxide with similar functions
- Also used as a glazing agent, acid regulator, releasing agent, and coating agent
- Found in chewing gum, meat pies, salt, and confectionery
E553a(i) Magnesium silicate (ii) Magnesium trisilicate
- Salt of silicon dioxide with similar functions
E553bTalc- Anti-caking agent, bulking agent, glazing agent
E554Sodium aluminium silicate- Anti-caking agent
- Used in salt and sugar products, egg mixes, flours, dried milk substitutes
E555Potassium aluminium silicate- Anti-caking agent
E570Fatty acids; stearic acid- Anti-caking agent, flavouring agent
- Baked products, chewing gum, confectionary, artificial sweeteners
E574Gluconic acid- Acidity regulator
E575Glucono delta-lactone (GDL); gluconolactone- Acidity regulator, preservative, raising agent
- Baked, meat, and cheese products
E576Sodium gluconate- Stabiliser, thickener, sequestrant
- Sodium salt of gluconic acid
E577Potassium gluconate- Sequestrant, stabiliser, anti-caking, thickening agent
- Potassium salt of gluconic acid
E578Calcium gluconate- Anti-caking agent, thickener, stabiliser, acidity regulator
- Calcium salt of gluconic acid
- Health products eg, bodybuilding formulas, sports drinks
- Dietary supplements (calcium source)
E579Ferrous gluconate- Colouring agent, nutritional supplement
- Processing black olives
- Iron source (food fortification)
E585Ferrous lactate- Acidity regulator, flavouring, colour retention agent, nutritional supplement
- Iron source (food fortification)
E620L-Glutamic acid- Naturally occurring amino acid obtained from protein but generally manufactured by bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates
- Used as a flavour enhancer and salt substitute
- Used as a nutrient to increase protein values
E621Monosodium glutamate (MSG)- Present naturally in seaweed but generally prepared chemically from sugar beet
- Flavour enhancer of protein rich foods
- Meat, Chinese foods, packet convenience meals and snacks (eg, soup), dried products, crisps, and potato snacks
E622Monopotassium glutamate- Similar to monosodium glutamate
E623Calcium glutamate- Similar to monosodium glutamate
E624Monoammonium glutamate- Ammonium salt of glutamic acid
E625Magnesium diglutamate E626Guanylic acid- More expensive additive
- May be found in snacks, packet soups, and instant noodles
E627Disodium guanylate- Occurs naturally in sardines and yeast extract but generally manufactured synthetically
- Used as a flavour enhancer
- Often added to crisps and other potato snacks, gravy granules and pre-cooked dried rice
E628Dipotassium guanylate- Flavour enhancer
- Potassium salt of guanylic acid
E629Calcium guanylate- Flavour enhancer
- Calcium salt of guanylic acid
E630Inosinic acid- Flavour enhancer
E631Disodium inosinate- Made from sardines and meat extract
E632Dipotassium inosinate- Flavour enhancer
E633Calcium inosinate- Flavour enhancer
E634Calcium 5'-ribonucleotides- Flavour enhancer
- Mainly used in low sodium (low salt) products
E635Sodium-5-ribonucleotide- Mixture of E627 and E631
- Added to crisps, potato snacks, and packet soups
E640Glycine and its sodium salt- Glycine is an amino acid
- Used as flavour enhancer and sweetener
- Also used in food supplements and protein drinks
E641L-leucine- Flavouring agent
E650Zinc acetate- Flavour enhancer
E900Dimethylpolysiloxane- Anti-foaming agent
E901Beeswax, white and yellow- Glazing agent
E902Candelilla wax- Glazing agent, occlusive
- Surface finishing agent
E903Carnauba wax- Glazing agent
- Confectionary, fruit, nuts, chocolate, chewing gum, baked goods, and coffee beans
E904Shellac- Glazing agent
- Fruit, candy coating
E905Microcrystalline wax- Glazing agent
- Fruit, candy, cheese, chewing gum
E907Hydrogenated poly-1-decene E914Oxidised polyethylene wax- Glazing / coating agent
E920L-cysteine- Amino acid
E927bCarbamide E938Argon- Packaging gas
E939Helium- Packaging gas
E941Nitrogen- Packaging gas
E942Nitrous oxide- Aerosol spray propellant
E943aButane- Aerosol spray propellant
E943bIso-butane- Aerosol spray propellant
E944Propane- Aerosol spray propellant
E948Oxygen- Packaging gas
E949Hydrogen- Packaging gas
E999Quillaia extract- Stabiliser, surfactant
- Humectant in baked goods
- Soft drink foaming agent
E1200Polydextrose- Naturally occurring sugar in grapes and corn
- Confectionery, cakes, biscuits, puddings, desserts, soft drinks, and convenience foods
E1201Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)- Stabiliser, emulsifier, thickener
- Food additive and used in wine production
E1202Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) - Clarifying agent for beer, wine, and vinegar
E1203 Polyvinyl alcohol- Thickener, glazing agent
- Powdered desserts, confectionary, food supplements
E1204 Pullulan- Thickener
- Natural polysaccharide
- Edible decorating film in bakery products and confectionary
- Thickener in sauces and dressings
E1205Basic methacrylate copolymer- Glazing/coating agent
E1206Neutral methacrylate copolymer- Glazing agent
E1207Anionic methacrylate copolymer- Glazing/coating agent
E1208Polyvinylpyrrolidone-vinyl acetate copolymer E1209Polyvinyl alcohol-polyethylene glycol-graft copolymer; PVA-PEG graft copolymer
- Glazing agent, stabiliser
E1400-1414Starches- Generally of maize, corn, potato, wheat, or tapioca in origin
- Used to modify texture and stability
- Sauces, chutneys, confectionery, desserts, meat, fish, dairy, and baked products
E1404Oxidised starch E1410Monostarch phosphate- Anti-caking agent, thickener, stabiliser, emulsifier, glazing agent
E1412Distarch phosphate- Modified starch
- Fruit gels and cream fillings, baked goods
E1413Phosphated distarch phosphate- Stabiliser while freezing / thawing
- Soups, sauces, frozen pies etc.
E1414Acetylated distarch phosphate- Stabiliser, emulsifier
E1420Acetylated starch- Modified starch
E1422Acetylated distarch adipate- Thickening agent
E1440Hydroxyl propyl starch- Modified starch
E1442Hydroxy propyl distarch phosphate- Modified starch
E1450Starch sodium octenyl succinate- Emulsifier
E1451Acetylated oxidised starch E1452Starch aluminium Octenyl succinate- Anti-caking, thickening, emulsifying, and glazing roles
E1505Triethyl citrate- Stabiliser, antioxidant, glazing agent
- Ester of citric acid
E1517Glyceryl diacetate; diacetin- Solvent for other additives
E1518Glyceryl triacetate; triacetin- Humectant, flavouring agent
E1520Propan-1,2-diol; propylene glycol- Synthetic carrier for extracts, flavours, and spices
- Functions as a stabiliser and humectant
- Miscellaneous foods
E1521Polyethylene glycol (PEG)- Colouring agent, emulsifier, flavouring, humectant
Food additives without E numbers
Numbers without an E prefix that are under consideration for becoming E numbers, and commonly used additives that have not yet been given numbers, are included in Table 7.
Table 7. Food additives without E numbers
**Name** **Description** **Examples of use**Arrowroot- Natural plant starch used as a thickening agent
- In glazes and jellies
Caffeine- Naturally occurring flavouring agent
- Used in energy drinks
- Labelling rules apply
Calciferol- [Vitamin D ](/topics/vitamin-d)
- Generally extracted from yeast
- Used to fortify margarine
Calcium bromate- Maturing agent and flour improver
Casein- Naturally present milk protein used as an emulsifier, texturiser, and a dietary supplement
- Miscellaneous foods
Chlorine- Synthetically prepared bleaching agent
- White flour, white bread, cakes, and puddings
Chlorine dioxide- Synthetically prepared additive, similar to chlorine
- Also used as a water purifier and oxidising agent
- Similar to chlorine
Corn syrup- Glucose obtained from corn or maize starch
- Used as a sweetener
- Miscellaneous foods
Extenders- Frequently a soya bean product, used to make meat go further
Fructose- Naturally occuring sugar, present in fruit and honey
- Acts as a sweetener
- Miscellaneous foods
Gelatine- Protein extract from animal bones and tissue
- Used as a stabiliser and gelling agent
- Jellies, glazes, certain dessert products
Hydrolysed vegetable protein (HVP)- Produced chemically from raw protein
- Soups, gravy, and meat products
Invert sugar- Syrup of 50% glucose and 50% fructose
- Humectant and sweetener
- Confectionary and sweet products
[Iodine](/topics/iodine)- Found in seafood
Lactose- Sugar present naturally in milk
- Used as a humectant and sweetener
Niacin / nicotinic acid- Naturally occurring B group vitamin
- Added to fortify food
Potassium bromate- Oxidising agent, improver, and bleaching agent
- Manufactured synthetically
- No longer approved in EU
Sodium chloride / salt- Naturally occurring mineral
- Acts as preservative and flavour enhancer
- Miscellaneous foods
Sucrose- From cane or beet sugar
- Preservative and sweetener
- Available as molasses, granulated caster, icing, and demerara sugar
Thiamine- Naturally occurring Vitamin B1
- Generally manufactured synthetically
- Added to fortify food
Vanillin- Naturally occurring flavouring
- Generally manufactured synthetically
Food Standards Agency. Approved additives and E numbers [Internet]. Updated February 15, 2022. Available from:
Additives: Why do we need them? Safeway Healthy Living Publication issued by Safeway Nutritional Advisory Service, Aylesford, Kent, United Kingdom.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand
Food Standards Agency (United Kingdom)
European Food Safety Authority
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA): Overview of Food Ingredients, Additives & Colors
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Fungal Skin Infections]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/fungal-skin-infections]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Fungal skin infections
Fungal skin infections — extra information
Ringworm of skin, Tinea of skin, Fungal infection of skin, Dermatophytosis
Fungal skin infections
Dermatophyte infections
Deep fungal infections
Other fungal infections
Differential diagnoses
Introduction to fungal infections
Candida general information
Napkin dermatitis (diaper rash)
Non-albicans candida infections
Oral candidiasis (oral thrush)
Vulvovaginal candidiasis (vaginal thrush)
Candida intertrigo (skin fold infection)
Paronychia (nail fold infections)
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Cyclic vulvovaginitis (cyclical symptoms due to vulvovaginal candidiasis)
Malassezia general information
Pityriasis (tinea) versicolor
Malassezia (pityrosporum) folliculitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Dermatophyte infections
Mycology (study of fungi)
Laboratory tests for fungal infection
Tinea barbae (fungal infection of the beard)
Tinea capitis (fungal infection of the scalp)
Tinea corporis (fungal infection of the trunk and limbs)
Tinea cruris (fungal infection of the groin)
Tinea faciei (fungal infection of the face)
Tinea incognito (steroid-treated fungal infection)
Tinea manuum (fungal infection of the hand)
Tinea pedis (fungal infection of the foot)
Tinea unguium (onychomycosis, fungal nail infection)
Majocchi granuloma (deep fungal infection of hair follicles)
Kerion (fungal abscess)
Dermatophytide (id) reactions (dermatitis in reaction to tinea infection)
Deep fungal infections
Alternaria alstroemeriae
Sporotrichoid spread
Other fungal infections
Tropical skin diseases
Treatment of fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Oral antifungal medications
Topical antifungal medications
Antifungal drug resistance
Differential diagnosis of fungal infections
Athlete's foot (rash between the toes, which is often caused by a fungal infection but not always)
Cradle cap (pityriasis capitis, infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis of the scalp)
Intertrigo (body fold rashes)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Generalised Pustular Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/generalised-pustular-psoriasis]
Generalised pustular psoriasis. Generalised pustulosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Generalised pustular psoriasis
Generalised pustular psoriasis — extra information
Acute generalised pustular psoriasis of von Zumbusch
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
238612002, 238613007, 38360005, 402327004
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Generalised pustular psoriasis
November 2022Authors: Piera Neill, The University of Auckland; Honorary Associate Professor Paul Jarrett, Dermatologist, Middlemore Hospital and Department of Medicine, The University of Auckland, New Zealand (2022)Previous contributors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2014); Vanessa Ngan (2003)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is generalised pustular psoriasis?
Generalised pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare, severe form of pustular psoriasis. It is characterised by recurrent flares of widespread sterile pustules with erythematous, painful skin. GPP can be associated with systemic inflammation including fevers and/or hepatic, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, renal, or pulmonary involvement.
It is also known as von Zumbusch psoriasis.
Generalised pustular psoriasis Generalised pustular psoriasis Generalised pustular psoriasis Pustular psoriasis on a limb in skin of colour Generalised pustular psoriasis Superficial pustules in generalised pustular psoriasis
Who gets generalised pustular psoriasis?
GPP can appear in any age group, although is most common in adults between 40–50 years old and is unusual in children. The age of onset is often earlier in patients with a family history of psoriasis, or with a homozygous interleukin 36 (IL-36) receptor antagonist (IL36RN) gene mutation.
Females are generally more likely to be affected, although, for paediatric onset between 3–16 years of age, a male predominance has been reported.
GPP can also affect pregnant women, which is termed impetigo herpetiformis, and is associated with increased maternal and fetal morbidity.
Although GPP is distinct from plaque psoriasis, the two conditions are strongly associated with one another, making concurrent or previous plaque psoriasis a significant risk factor for developing GPP.
What causes generalised pustular psoriasis?
The exact pathogenic mechanisms are not fully established. However, GPP is associated with a combination of genetic and environmental risk factors.
Genetic predispositions
Several genetic mutations are associated with GPP, including homozygous and heterozygous mutations in genes involved in the regulation of immune and inflammatory pathways, such as:
IL36RN (interleukin 36 receptor antagonist) — homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations are associated with GPP not accompanied by plaque psoriasis
CARD14 (caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 14) — significant risk for GPP with plaque psoriasis
AP1S3 (adaptor-related protein complex 1 subunit sigma 3)
MPO (myeloperoxidase)
SERPINA3 (Serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 3).
Genetic screening for GPP may potentially be available in future.
Environmental risk factors
Use of (or tapering/stopping) various medications may be associated with GPP, such as:
Analgesics: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), morphine
Anti-hypertensives: ramipril, diltiazem
Antimicrobials: amoxicillin, pristinamycin, sulfonamides, terbinafine
Antiplatelet agents: aspirin, clopidogrel
Other medications including rituximab, lithium, potassium iodide, progestins, and hydroxychloroquine
Topical agents: topical calcipotriol and steroid combination, topical coal tar
Paradoxical reaction to tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors and ustekinumab (see paradoxical psoriasis)
Abrupt withdrawal of systemic corticosteroids or ciclosporin
Vaccinations, including against COVID-19 and H1N1 (swine flu).
Trichophyton rubrum (dermatophyte fungus that can cause fungal nail and skin infections)
Streptococcal species
Varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox and shingles)
Hypocalcaemia (can be secondary to hypoparathyroidism)
Ultraviolet radiation from sunlight, and sunburns
Stem cell transplantation
What are the clinical features of generalised pustular psoriasis?
Inflammation (redness, swelling, tenderness, itch) develops initially, usually in areas of large skinfolds.
Within 2–3 hours, 2–3mm sterile non-follicular pustules appear, which then converge to form ‘lakes’ of pus. The trunk and limbs are most commonly affected.
Over the following days to weeks, pustules dry out and usually resolve with residual erythema and desquamation, or may evolve into erythrodermic psoriasis.
Lesions tend to regress without sequelae, although hypertrophic scars or keloids may occur.
GPP is characterised by recurrent acute flares; successive crops of pustules may appear and erupt every few days or weeks.
Non-cutaneous features
Systemic — fatigue, malaise, fever, headache, tremors, anorexia, nausea, tachycardia.
Mucosal — cheilitis, geographic or fissured tongue.
Ocular — conjunctivitis, iritis, uveitis.
Bone and joint — arthritis, osteomyelitis.
Gastrointestinal — jaundice, epigastric tenderness.
Other — nail abnormalities, lower limb oedema.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The varying clinical presentation of GPP between differing skin types is not well documented, mainly due to the rarity of the disease. Erythema can be under-recognised in skin of colour, and therefore the severity of inflammation can be underestimated.
What are the complications of generalised pustular psoriasis?
Complications of acute skin failure include:
Bacteraemia/septicaemia
Fluid loss with hypovolaemia
Impaired thermoregulatory control
Metabolic disturbance.
Other potential complications of GPP:
Peripheral neuropathy
Malabsorption of nutrients and medications
Disturbed protein and electrolyte balance
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Neutrophilic cholangitis leading to cholestasis
Such complications can be fatal. Death can result from cardiorespiratory failure during the acute eruptive phase of generalised pustular psoriasis, so it is essential to treat it as early as possible. Older patients are at particularly high risk.
Maternal GPP can result in foetal abnormalities, preterm birth, placental insufficiency, and neonatal death.
How is generalised pustular psoriasis diagnosed?
GPP can be a diagnostic challenge due to its rarity, its heterogeneous cutaneous and extracutaneous symptomatology, its similarity to other conditions such as acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis, and the lack of standardised international diagnostic criteria.
According to the 2018 Japanese guidelines, a definitive diagnosis of GPP can be made in patients with all four of the following features:
Systemic symptoms such as fever and fatigue
Extensive or systemic flushing accompanied by multiple sterile pustules that can coalesce into lakes of pus
Neutrophilic subcorneal pustules, histopathologically characterised by Kogoj’s spongiform pustules
Repeated recurrences of these clinical and histopathological findings.
GPP would be diagnosed if all four of the above features were present and would be suspected in patients with features 2 and 3.
Abnormal laboratory tests may include:
Leukocytosis, lymphopenia
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
C-reactive protein (CRP)
Liver enzymes (AST, ALT)
Plasma globulins (IgG or IgA).
Positive blood cultures (if secondary bacterial infection)
Hypoalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia, hypocalcaemia
Skin biopsy may show:
Superficial (subcorneal) pustules and neutrophilic infiltration — Kogoj’s spongiform pustules are a distinct histopathologic feature
Elongated rete ridges
Reduced stratum granulosum
Capillary dilation of the papillary dermis
Munro’s microabscesses.
Diagnostic criteria were also described in the 2017 European Rare and Severe Psoriasis Expert Network (ERASPEN) which can be found here.
What is the differential diagnosis for generalised pustular psoriasis?
Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Annular pustular psoriasis
Dermatitis with secondary infection
Pustular erythema multiforme
Generalised pustular drug eruptions
Dermatitis herpetiformis
What is the treatment for generalised pustular psoriasis?
GPP is severe, and complications can be life-threatening. It should be treated promptly and usually hospitalisation is needed. Intensive care support may be necessary.
Emollients and moisturisers.
Intravenous fluids and electrolytes.
If pregnant, careful monitoring of mother and foetus.
Mild potency steroids, eg, triamcinolone.
Phototherapy — usually in combination with systemic agents.
Antibiotics in the case of secondary bacterial infection.
Non-biologic agents:
Oral retinoids (acitretin)
Less commonly — apremilast, hydroxyurea, colchicine, dapsone.
TNFα antagonists — adalimumab, infliximab, certolizumab, etanercept
Interleukin 17 (IL-17) antagonists — brodalumab, secukinumab, ixekizumab, bimekizumab
Interleukin 23 (IL-23) and 12 (IL-12) antagonists — guselkumab, risankizumab, ustekinumab
Interleukin 1 (IL-1) antagonists — canakinumab, gevokizumab
Interleukin 36 (IL-36) antagonists — spesolimab. Imsidolimab is currently under investigation.
What is the outcome of generalised pustular psoriasis?
GPP is an incurable condition, with an unpredictable and variable course.
Data on mortality rates are limited, but have been reported between 3–7%. Older patients likely have a poorer prognosis than younger patients due to comorbidities and systemic complications.
Fujita H, Gooderham M, Romiti R. Diagnosis of Generalized Pustular Psoriasis. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(Suppl 1):31–38. doi:10.1007/s40257-021-00652-1. PubMed
Fujita H, Terui T, Hayama K, Akiyama M, Ikeda S, Mabuchi T, et al. Japanese guidelines for the management and treatment of generalized pustular psoriasis: The new pathogenesis and treatment of GPP. J Dermatol. 2018 Nov;45(11):1235-1270. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14523. PubMed
Hoegler KM, John AM, Handler MZ, Schwartz RA. Generalized pustular psoriasis: a review and update on treatment. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018;32(10): 1645–51. doi:10.1111/jdv.14949. PubMed
Krueger J, Puig L, Thaçi D. Treatment Options and Goals for Patients with Generalized Pustular Psoriasis. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(Suppl 1):51–64. doi:10.1007/s40257-021-00658-9. PubMed
Ly K, Beck KM, Smith MP, Thibodeaux Q, Bhutani T. Diagnosis and screening of patients with generalized pustular psoriasis. Psoriasis (Auckl). 2019;9:37–42. Published 2019 Jun 20. doi:10.2147/PTT.S181808. PubMed
Romiti R, Hirayama ALDS, Arnone M, Magalhães RF. Generalized pustular psoriasis (von Zumbusch). An Bras Dermatol. 2022;97(1):63–74. doi:10.1016/j.abd.2021.05.011. PubMed
Pustular psoriasis of pregnancy
Drug-induced psoriasis
Chronic plaque psoriasis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Palmoplantar pustulosis (hands and feet)
Acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau (pustulosis of digits).
Pustular psoriasis — US National Psoriasis Foundation
My Psoriasis — Information for New Zealand patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, sponsored by AbbVie
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Genital Herpes]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/genital-herpes]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Genital herpes — extra information
Genital herpes simplex, Herpes genitalis
A60.9, A60.09, A60.00, A60.01
1A94.0, 1A94.Z, JA62.4
33839006, 402888002, 402894005, 423391007, 440714005, 427578006, 27420004, 59819007, 40289001, 402896007, 104011000119109, 10227000, 240478003, 240479006
Author: Dr Jane Morgan, Sexual Health Physician, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Updated by Dr Daniela Vanousova, Dermatologist, Czech Republic, July 2015.
Primary genital herpes infection
Recurrent genital herpes infection
Asymptomatic shedding of herpes virus
Herpes simplex and pregnancy
Herpes vaccine development
What is herpes simplex?
Herpes simplex is one of the most frequent infections of mankind throughout the world. There are two main types of herpes simplex virus (HSV); type 1, which is mainly associated with facial infections and type 2, which is mainly genital, although there is considerable overlap.
Both type 1 and type 2 herpes simplex viruses reside in a latent state in the nerves that supply sensation to the skin. With each episode of herpes simplex, the virus grows down the nerves and out into the skin or mucous membranes where it multiplies, causing the clinical lesion. After each episode, it "dies back" up the nerve fibre and enters the resting state again.
How common is genital herpes?
Studies have found that up to 1 in 5 adults have evidence of HSV-2 infection. Most of these people have either no or only very mild symptoms, such that they are unaware of having been infected.
Transmission of genital herpes
Primary genital herpes infection
Primary or first genital HSV infections may be mild and unnoticed, but should lesions develop, the severity is generally greater than in recurrences.
Penile ulceration from herpetic infection is the most frequent cause of genital ulceration seen in sexual health clinics. The ulcers are most frequent on the glans, foreskin and shaft of the penis. They are sore or painful and last for 2 to 3 weeks, if untreated. The local lymph glands are enlarged and tender.
In women, similar lesions occur on the external genitalia and the mucosae of the vulva, vagina and cervix. Pain and difficulty passing urine are common.
Some people also have flu-like symptoms with fever, headache and muscular aches and pains. Symptoms tend to be more severe in women than in men.
Following the initial infection, immunity develops but does not fully protect against further episodes (recurrence). Where immunity is deficient, for example, in those living with HIV/AIDS, both initial and recurrent infections tend to occur more frequently and to be more pronounced.
Recurrent genital herpes infection
After the initial infection, obvious or inapparent, there may be no further clinical manifestations throughout life. Recurrences are more frequent with type 2 genital herpes than with type 1.
Recurrences can be triggered by:
Ultraviolet radiation (sun).
Menstrual cycle (flare-ups may occur before the monthly period).
Recurrent infections differ from first infections in that the blisters are usually smaller in size and more closely grouped. They also tend to be of shorter duration than the initial infection, usually 5–10 days. Generally, the affected person feels quite well.
Itching or burning can precede by an hour or two the development of small, closely grouped blisters on a red base. These then produce shallow ulcers, on the glans or shaft of the penis in men and on the labia, vagina or cervix in women. Recurrences can cause distressingly painful symptoms, or the lesions can be unnoticed. Lesions normally heal in 7–10 days without scarring. Recurrences tend to be in the same region, but not always at the identical site.
Complications of genital herpes
Complications may include:
Urethritis (inflammation of the urethra, the urinary outflow tract), which results in ulceration. There may be no tell-tale blisters so that the presentation is identical to gonorrhoea or chlamydia urethritis.
Proctitis (rectal infection), which can occur without external lesions. Symptoms include fever, rectal pain, watery discharge, and autonomic nerve dysfunction that may result in difficulty passing urine.
Neurogenic (nerve) pain -leg and thigh pain, which often leads up to a recurrence.
Widespread infection is seen in debilitated or immune-suppressed patients.
Asymptomatic shedding of herpes virus
Intermittent shedding of HSV from genital skin may occur without symptoms or with unrecognised minor symptoms. The frequency of asymptomatic shedding is more common in those with type 2 genital herpes and in those who have been infected recently. Shedding is most likely to occur in the week before or after a recurrence.
Herpes simplex and pregnancy
In women who already have genital herpes before becoming pregnant, most can experience a safe pregnancy and vaginal delivery. There is only a minimal risk of the baby being affected. It is important that the diagnosis is discussed with the lead maternity carer so that consideration can be given to Caesarean section if there are lesions present during labour.
The highest risk to the baby is when the first episode of genital herpes occurs in the first few weeks of the pregnancy or in the last few weeks before delivery. These situations should be discussed with a specialist. Genital herpes does not affect fertility.
What is the treatment for genital herpes?
If you have herpes simplex, ask your doctor's advice. Antiviral drugs are indicated for primary herpes simplex infection, as symptoms may last for three weeks if no treatment is given. Patients with significant recurrences may require repeated courses or continuous prophylactic therapy for two months or more. Mild, uncomplicated recurrences of herpes simplex usually require no treatment.
Available antiviral drugs include:
In New Zealand, aciclovir and valaciclovir are currently subsidised by PHARMAC (June 2016). These antiviral drugs will stop the herpes simplex virus multiplying once it reaches the skin or mucous membranes but cannot eradicate the virus from its resting stage within the nerve cells. They can, therefore, shorten and prevent episodes while the drug is being taken, but a single course cannot prevent future episodes.
Different formulations of topical antiviral creams are available. They are not generally recommended for genital herpes and are not subsidised for this use in New Zealand.
Other treatments being studied include:
Imiquimod cream, an immune enhancer
Human leukocyte interferon-alpha cream.
Both appear less beneficial than conventional antiviral drugs.
Herpes vaccine development
Vaccine development is an area of active research, and several different approaches are being tested in animal models, including therapeutic vaccines that might help those already infected. In May 2015, a promising vaccine design was announced. [1]
Radical Vaccine Design Effective Against Herpes Viruses – Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI)
Viral skin infections
Genital skin problems
Sexually transmitted infections
Genital herpes — BestHealth from BMJ Publishing; free access for New Zealanders subsidised by Ministry of Health
New Zealand Herpes Foundation
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe New Zealand
Genital Herpes — EmedicineHealth
Genital Herpes — CDC: Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
Genital Herpes in Pregnancy — Medscape Reference
Dermatologic Manifestations of Herpes Simplex — Medscape Reference
Herpes Guide.ca — SkinCareGuide.com
Herpes, genital — BestHealth
Genital Herpes — EADV
Herpes Viruses Association UK
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Genital Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/genital-psoriasis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Genital psoriasis — extra information
Anogenital psoriasis, Perianal psoriasis, Psoriasis of the vulva, Psoriasis of the penis, Napkin psoriasis
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
402314003 402315002, 111188005
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author: Dr Priyam Sobarun, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand; Copy Editor: Clare Morrison; Chief Editor: Dr Amanda Oakley, June 2014.
What is genital psoriasis?
Psoriasis is a common, long-term scaly skin condition that affects approximately 2% of the population. Genital psoriasis affects the genital skin, which includes the pubic area, vulva or penis, skin folds including natal cleft, and buttocks. It is known as anogenital psoriasis when psoriasis also affects perianal skin. Psoriasis does not affect mucosal surfaces.
Genital skin can also be affected in inverse or flexural psoriasis, psoriasis that mainly affects the skin folds. Genital psoriasis may be associated with considerable discomfort and embarrassment, and may severely impair the quality of life and sexual well-being of those affected.
Who gets genital psoriasis?
Genital psoriasis affects males and females, children and adults. In children, genital psoriasis is most common under the age of 2, when it presents as psoriatic napkin eruption.
What are the clinical features of genital psoriasis?
Psoriasis of the external genitalia and perianal area often presents as well-demarcated, bright red, thin plaques. These usually lack scale, as friction between the skin surfaces rubs it off. Scales may be seen on the outer parts of the genital skin. Scales can be easily scraped off, leaving pinpoint bleeding.
In women, vulval psoriasis appears symmetrical. It can vary from silvery, scaly patches adjacent to the labia majora to moist, greyish plaques or glossy red plaques without scaling in the skin folds.
In men, the penis and scrotum may be involved. The glans penis, the bulbous part of the end of the penis, and the corona (the base or "crown" of the glans) are most commonly affected. In circumcised men, plaques can be more scaly than on the rest of the genital skin. In uncircumcised men, nonscaling plaques are more common.
Psoriatic napkin eruption presents as red and sometimes silvery plaques with well-defined borders in the nappy area of children under the age of 2 years. It usually clears up after a few months to a year, but may later generalise into plaque psoriasis.
Psoriasis in genital areas can be very itchy at times. The plaques may also be fissured and painful.
Psoriasis does not lead to scarring. The skin can return to a normal appearance with treatment or spontaneously.
What causes genital psoriasis?
Genital or anogenital psoriasis may be part of more generalised psoriasis. Psoriasis has multifactorial genetic and environmental causes. These are not fully understood. In the anogenital area, specific factors to consider include:
Colonisation by bacteria and yeasts (Candida albicans)
Injury to the skin, causing new plaques of psoriasis to develop (Koebner phenomenon)
Tight-fitting clothes
Friction associated with sexual intercourse.
How is the diagnosis of psoriasis made?
The diagnosis of psoriasis is usually made by its clinical appearance, with symmetrical, circumscribed erythematous plaques. Laboratory tests such as swabs and skin biopsies are rarely necessary.
Histologically, there is no apparent difference between ano and non-genital psoriasis.
What is the treatment of genital psoriasis?
Treatment of genital psoriasis is individualised. There is limited published data for efficacy and safety of treatment options. The following suggestions for treatment of genital psoriasis are based on expert opinions and case reports.
Topical corticosteroid cream
A weak or moderate-potency topical steroid cream may be used as required.
Short-term intermittent use of moderate-to potent corticosteroids may be necessary but should be followed by a return to use of a weaker preparation.
Intensive, short-term, intermittent use of potent corticosteroids should be limited to a few weeks under the supervision of a medical practitioner.
There is increased absorption of topical steroids in genital skin, which can cause skin thinning.
Coal-tar derivatives
Mild topical coal tar preparations can be used alone or when treatment with a weak topical steroid is insufficient. Tar or ichthammol may be used, with zinc oxide, for napkin psoriasis.
Tar preparations can irritate. Mixing a tar with a steroid cream may reduce irritation.
Vitamin D analogues such as calcipotriol cream can be cautiously used alone or in combination with topical steroids. However, they may irritate genital skin.
Bland emollients can be used as required to reduce skin irritation and act as a barrier cream.
Genital skin infections should be treated promptly.
Therapy-resistant penile and vulval plaques should be re-evaluated clinically and histologically to rule out malignancy (penile intraepithelial neoplasia and vulval intraepithelial neoplasia).
Treatments to avoid in the genital area
Dithranol, tazarotene, UV rays (UVB phototherapy and photochemotherapy) and laser therapy should be avoided in the genital area.
ReferencesMeeuwis KA, De Hullu JA, Massuger LF, Van de Kerkhof PC, Van Rossum, MM. Genital psoriasis: a systematic literature review on this hidden skin disease. Acta Derm Venereol. 2011; 91(1): 5–11. PubMed.
Busch Angie L, et al. Paediatric psoriasis. Skin Therapy Letter. 2012; 17(1): 4–7. PubMed.
Mayser P, Schütz M, Schuppe H -C, Jung A, Schill W -B. Frequency and spectrum of Malassezia yeasts in the area of the prepuce and glans penis. BJU International. 2001; 88: 554–8. doi: 10.1046/j.1464-410X.2001.02375.x. PubMed.
Drug-induced psoriasis
Drug-induced psoriasis
Other websitesPsoriasis — Medscape Reference
Vulvar psoriasis — International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Diseases (ISSVD)
MyPsoriasis.co.nz — Information for New Zealand patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, sponsored by AbbVie
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Genital Skin Problems]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/genital-skin-problems]
Genital skin problems
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Genital skin problems
Genital skin problems — extra information
Genital itch, Genital pain
GA34.6, MF3A, 1A97, GA0Z, GB07
703865001, 400019007, 724861006, 371347004, 26780200, 31255003, 271939006, 27902002, 162143008
Genital skin problems
Genital itch in males
Genital pain in males
Genital itch in females
Genital pain in females
Non-sexually transmitted skin infections
Sexually transmitted infections
Genital skin lesions
Genital skin problems are very common and can be very itchy or painful, distressing and embarrassing. They can interfere with sexual functioning, self-image and interpersonal relationships. Some genital disorders are contagious, including sexually transmitted diseases.
Genital itch in males
Genital pain in males
Genital itch in females
Genital pain in females
Non-sexually transmitted skin infections affecting genital area (males and females)
Sexually transmitted infections (males and females)
Genital skin lesions (males and females)
Diagnosis of genital conditions
Treatment of genital conditions
Vulval lumps and bumps
Genital itch in males
Pruritus ani (itchy anus)
Balanitis (inflammation of the glans penis in males)
Dermatitis (eczema), including:
Lichen simplex (dermatitis due to localised itch-scratch-itch response and resulting in thickened skin on scrotum)
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Seborrhoeic dermatitis (usually affects scalp as well)
Intertrigo (in skin folds)
Genital pain in males
Balanitis (inflammation of the tip of the penis)
Crohn disease, which may cause swelling, ulcers and granulomas
Dysaesthesia and/or burning discomfort (and less often, itching) of the penis (penodynia) and/or scrotum (scrotodynia) in the absence of a primary skin problem. The affected area is often redder than normal.
Erosive lichen planus (which often also affects the mouth)
Lichen sclerosus in men
Plasma cell balanitis
Pudendal nerve entrapment syndrome
Genital itch in females
Itchy anus (pruritus ani)
Itchy vulva (pruritus vulvae) in adult women
Itchy vulva (pruritus vulvae) in prepubertal girls
Dermatitis (eczema), including:
Lichen simplex (dermatitis due to localised itch-scratch-itch response and resulting in thickened skin on labia majora
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Seborrhoeic dermatitis (usually affects scalp as well)
the most common cause of vulvitis
Intertrigo (in skin folds)
Psoriasis (persistent, well-defined, red, scaly or moist patches)
Lichen sclerosus (white scarred patches)
Genital pain in females
Dyspareunia (painful sex)
Recurrent fissuring of posterior fourchette
Atrophic vulvovaginitis
Non-sexually acquired acute recurrent genital ulceration (complex recurrent aphthous ulceration)
Non-sexually acquired acute reactive genital ulceration
Erosive lichen planus (which often also affects the mouth)
Plasma cell vulvitis
Desquamative vaginitis
Crohn disease, which may cause swelling, ulcers and granulomas
Pudendal nerve entrapment syndrome
Spasm in pelvic muscles leading to vaginismus
When no cause has been found for vulval pain, the term vulvodynia is sometimes used. This has been classified into provoked localised vulvodynia (or vestibulodynia) and generalised spontaneous vulvodynia (dysaesthetic vulvodynia or neuropathic pain).
Vaginal or genital malodour
Non-sexually transmitted skin infections
Sexually transmitted infections
Desquamative vaginitis
Bacterial vaginosis (cause of frothy discharge)
Non-sexually transmitted skin infections
Non-venereal skin infections may present in the genital area, presumably because the organisms thrive in warmth and humidity.
Bacterial skin infections include:
Boils (deep infection of hair follicles)
Folliculitis (surface infection of hair follicles)
Impetigo (school sores)
Erythrasma (dry brown patches)
Cutaneous tuberculosis (rare).
Fungal skin infections include:
Tinea cruris (Jock itch)
Vulvovaginal candidiasis (thrush).
Viral skin infections include:
Genital herpes, the commonest cause of recurrent blisters or sores
Genital warts, the commonest cause of papules in this region
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Molluscum contagiosum.
The groin is also a favoured site for some parasitic infestations:
Sexually transmitted infections
Important sexually transmitted infections (STIs) include:
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Granuloma inguinale (donovanosis)
Molluscum contagiosum.
Genital skin lesions
Non-infectious skin lesions and miscellaneous conditions that are commonly found in the genital area include:
Angiokeratomas (red/purple spots)
Hidradenitis suppurativa (boil-like lumps in skin folds)
Hailey Hailey (blisters in skin folds)
Labial adhesions in prepubertal girls
Labial adhesions in adults
Sebaceous adenitis (inflamed papules on labia minora)
Milia, pilar and epidermal cysts
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia or VIN (also called vulval squamous cell carcinoma in situ), which includes Bowenoid papulosis
Penile intraepithelial neoplasia or PIN (also called penile squamous cell carcinoma in situ, Bowen disease of the penis, erythroplasia of Quyerat)
Anal intraepithelial neoplasia or AIN (also called anal squamous cell carcinoma in situ)
Invasive squamous cell carcinoma including vulval cancer and anal cancer (arising from genital warts). Vulval cancer can also arise from lichen sclerosus or lichen planus)
Extramammary Paget disease
Genital melanotic macules or melanosis (harmless brown marks in which there is more pigment in the skin cells)
Mucosal melanoma (a rare form of skin cancer in which there is an uncontrolled proliferation of pigment cells)
Pearly penile papules
Peyronie disease, in which a fibrous band appears on the penis.
How are genital disorders diagnosed?
A careful history and full skin examination, including genital skin, are recommended. Tests often include:
Swabs from the affected skin, urethral or vagina for bacteria, yeast and virus culture
How are genital disorders treated?
Treatment depends on the individual condition.
Genital skin is delicate, so treatment must be undertaken gently. Wash once or twice daily with warm water. Avoid soap; a pH balanced non-soap cleanser can be used but should be rinsed off.
Vulvitis, vaginitis and cervicitis – Therapeutics in Dermatology, Fondation René Touraine
Vulvovaginal Disorders: an algorithm for basic adult diagnosis and treatment — ISSVD
Vulval conditions and management — Michigan Medicine
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Geographic Tongue]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/geographic-tongue]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Geographic tongue — extra information
Benign migratory glossitis, Oral erythema migrans, Psoriasiform mucositis, Lingual erythema migrans, Geographical tongue, Glossitis areata exfoliativa, Glossitis areata migrans, Lingual geographica
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Dr Anita Eshraghi, Dermatologist, Sweden. March 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is geographic tongue?
Geographic tongue is a benign oral inflammatory condition characterised by loss of epithelium, particularly of the filiform papillae on the dorsum of the tongue.
Geographic tongue is also called benign migratory glossitis because the signs move around.
Geographic tongue Geographic tongue Geographic tongue Geographic tongue Geographic tongue Geographic tongue
Who gets geographic tongue?
Geographic tongue affects approximately 1–3% of the adult population worldwide. It is less common in children. The incidence is twice as high in women than in men. Patients may have a family history of geographic tongue or fissured tongue.
What causes geographic tongue?
The cause of geographic tongue is unknown but geographic tongue occurs more often in patients who have psoriasis, especially pustular psoriasis.
What are the clinical features of geographic tongue?
Geographic tongue is characterised by irregularly-shaped, red, map-like, smooth and swollen patches surrounded by white lines. Geographic tongue can occur suddenly and persist for months or longer, and may often recur.
Most often there are no symptoms but burning or irritation of the tongue are common, particularly when eating hot, spicy and acidic food.
What are the complications of geographic tongue?
There are no major long-term complications associated with geographic tongue.
How is geographic tongue diagnosed?
The diagnosis of geographic tongue is based on clinical examination of the tongue and the patient history. Routine laboratory tests are usually normal.
What is the differential diagnosis for geographic tongue?
The differential diagnosis for geographic tongue includes:
Oral psoriasis (rare)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
What is the treatment for geographic tongue?
There is no cure for geographic tongue. Usually, no treatment is required apart from reassurance.
Discomfort and burning sensations can be treated by avoiding eating hot, spicy and acidic food. Symptomatic treatments may include:
Topical anaesthetic agents
Antihistamine and anaesthetic mouthwash
What is the outcome for geographic tongue?
Scully C. Oral medicine and maxillofacial pathology. Churchill Livingstone 2008. ISBN 978-0-443-06818-8.
Assimakopoulos D, Patrikakos G, Fotika C, Elisaf M. Benign migratory glossitis or geographic tongue: An enigmatic oral lesion. Am J Med 2002;113:751–5. PubMed
Kovac-Kovacic M, Skaleric U. The prevalence of oral mucosal lesions in a population in Ljubljana, Slovenia. J Oral Pathol Med 2000;29:331–5. PubMed
Ishibashi M, Tojo G, Watanabe M, Tamabuchi T, Masu T, Aiba S. Geographic tongue treated with topical tacrolimus. J Dermatol Case Rep. 2010;4:57–59. PubMed
Zadik Y, Drucker S, Pallmon S. Migratory stomatitis (ectopic geographic tongue) on the floor of the mouth. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65:459–460. PubMed
Goswami M, Verma A, Verma M. Benign migratory glossitis with fissured tongue. J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent. 2012;30:173–175. PubMed
Zargari O. The prevalence and significance of fissured tongue and geographical tongue in psoriatic patients. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2006;2:192–95. PubMed
Geographic tongue — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Granular Parakeratosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/granular-parakeratosis]
Granular parakeratosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Granular parakeratosis
Granular parakeratosis — extra information
Axillary granular parakeratosis, Recurrent flexural pellagroid dermatitis, Hyperkeratotic flexural erythema
Granular parakeratosis
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2008. Updated December 2016 and June 2023.
What is granular parakeratosis?
Granular parakeratosis is an uncommon red and scaly skin condition that mainly affects body folds, most often the armpits. It has a characteristic appearance under the microscope.
It is also called hyperkeratotic flexural erythema and may be the same condition as recurrent flexural pellagroid dermatitis [1].
Who gets granular parakeratosis?
Granular parakeratosis is often reported in middle-aged women but has been reported to affect babies, children and men of all races.
What are the clinical features of granular parakeratosis?
Granular parakeratosis Granular parakeratosis Granular parakeratosis
How is granular parakeratosis diagnosed?
Granular parakeratosis is diagnosed by skin biopsy. There is a distinctive reaction pattern on histopathology (parakeratosis, hypergranulosis (hence its name), acanthosis, papillomatosis and prominent blood vessels).
The affected areas should be swabbed and any pathogen treated with antibiotics.
What is the cause of granular parakeratosis?
Granular parakeratosis is thought to be provoked by friction, occlusion, and sweating.
A defect in filaggrin production may predispose to granular parakeratosis. This protein is normally present in the upper epidermis, but there are various genetic variants that lead to a weakness of the skin's barrier function. These include a common cause of dry skin, ichthyosis vulgaris.
This may induce proliferation and abnormal development of the skin cells (keratinocytes).
Changes in the skin microbiota have also been blamed.
How is granular parakeratosis treated?
Treatments that have been reported to be useful include:
Topical steroids — but not always
Antibiotics eg, doxycycline
Keratolytic agents such as lactic acid
Dear K, Gan D, Stavrakoglou A, Ronaldson C, Nixon RL. Hyperkeratotic flexural erythema (more commonly known as granular parakeratosis) with use of laundry sanitizers containing benzalkonium chloride. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2022;47(12):2196-2200. doi:10.1111/ced.15358 Journal
English JC 3rd, Derdeyn AS, Wilson WM, Patterson JW. Axillary granular parakeratosis. J Cutan Med Surg. 2003 Jul-Aug;7(4):330–2. PubMed.
Wallace CA, Pichardo RO, Yosipovitch G, Hancox J, Sangueza OP. Granular parakeratosis: a case report and literature review. J Cutan Pathol. 2003 May;30(5):332–5. PubMed.
Robinson AJ, Foster RS, Halbert AR, King E, Orchard D. Granular parakeratosis induced by benzalkonium chloride exposure from laundry rinse aids. Australas J Dermatol. 2016 Sep 19. doi: 10.1111/ajd.12551. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 27641714. Pubmed.
Ding CY, Liu H, Khachemoune A. Granular Parakeratosis: A Comprehensive Review and a Critical Reappraisal. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2015 Dec;16(6):495–500. doi: 10.1007/s40257-015-0148-2. Review. PubMed PMID: 26242230. PubMed.
Scaly skin conditions
Intertrigo (rashes in skin folds)
Pigmentation disorders
Benzalkonium chloride
Granular Parakeratosis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Granuloma Annulare]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/granuloma-annulare]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Granuloma annulare — extra information
Necrobiotic papulosis
65508009, 402364005, 402365006, 402363004, 402366007
Last Reviewed: February, 2025
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated October 2015. Revised September 2020.
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson, United Kingdom (2025)
What is granuloma annulare?
Granuloma annulare (GA) is a common inflammatory skin condition typified clinically by annular, smooth, discoloured papules and plaques, and necrobiotic granulomas on histology. Granuloma annulare is more correctly known as necrobiotic papulosis.
Who gets granuloma annulare?
Granuloma annulare is seen most commonly on the skin of children, teenagers, or young adults. The generalised form is more likely to be found in older adults (mean age 50 years). There is a female predominance of 2:1 over males.
What is the cause of granuloma annulare?
Granuloma annulare may be a delayed hypersensitivity reaction to a component of the dermis or a reaction pattern to numerous triggers. Reported triggering events have included many skin infections and infestations, and types of skin trauma. Inflammation is mediated by tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα). The reason this occurs is unknown.
There have also been a number of associations reported with systemic conditions including autoimmune thyroiditis, diabetes mellitus, other organ-specific autoimmune diseases, hyperlipidaemia, and rarely with lymphoma, HIV infection and solid tumours.
What are the clinical features of granuloma annulare?
Granuloma annulare can occur on any site of the body and is occasionally widespread. It only affects the skin. Granuloma annulare may cause no symptoms, but affected areas are often tender when knocked. The plaques tend to slowly change shape, size, and position.
Localised granuloma annulare
The localised form is the most common type of granuloma annulare in general, and specifically in children. One or more skin coloured or red bumps form rings in the skin over joints, particularly the knuckles. The surface is smooth and the centre of each ring is often a little depressed. Localised granuloma annulare usually affects the fingers or the backs of both hands, but is also common on top of the foot or ankle, and over one or both elbows. Annular rings may be solitary or multiple, and grow outwards maintaining the ring shape before eventually clearing.
Granuloma annulare Granuloma annulare Granuloma annulare
Generalised disseminated granuloma annulare
Generalised granuloma annulare usually presents in adults, as widespread skin-coloured, pinkish or slightly mauve-coloured patches. The disseminated type is composed of small papules, usually arranged symmetrically in poorly-defined rings 10 cm or more in diameter. They are often found around the skin folds of the trunk (armpits, groin). Itch is common. This is the commonest form associated with HIV.
Granuloma annulare Granuloma annulare Granuloma annulare
Subcutaneous granuloma annulare
Subcutaneous granuloma annulare is an uncommon form seen mainly in children. It presents as rubbery lumps (nodules) on scalp margins, fingertips, and shins. Subcutaneous granuloma annulare is also called pseudo-rheumatoid nodules because the subcutaneous lesions look rather like rheumatoid nodules; however, they do not arise in association with rheumatoid arthritis.
Granuloma annulare Granuloma annulare
Perforating granuloma annulare
Perforating granuloma annulare presents as yellowish plaques or papules on which a crust forms due to the elimination of damaged collagen through the epidermis. Perforating granuloma annulare is usually localised to the hands, but plaques may occasionally arise on any body site, especially within scars. Dermoscopy helps to confirm the presence of perforations in small papules within otherwise typical plaques of granuloma annulare. Perforating lesions are frequently itchy or tender. Perforating granuloma annulare is uncommon except in ethnic Hawaiians and in association with HIV. All age groups can be affected.
Atypical granuloma annulare
Atypical granuloma annulare describes:
Granuloma annulare in unusual sites, such as the face, palms, and ears
Granuloma annulare with photosensitive distribution
Unusually severe or symptomatic granuloma annulare
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis is a finding noted on histology in some patients with extensive granuloma annulare or other disorders with similar clinical presentation.
How is granuloma annulare diagnosed?
Granuloma annulare is usually diagnosed clinically because of its characteristic appearance. But sometimes the diagnosis is not obvious, and other conditions may be considered. Skin biopsy usually shows necrobiotic degeneration of dermal collagen surrounded by an inflammatory reaction. See granuloma annulare pathology.
Granuloma annulare is often initially misdiagnosed as tinea because of the annular appearance; the lack of surface scale should lead away from this and other scaly rashes such as discoid eczema or psoriasis. Actinic granuloma is considered by some to be a photo-aggravated variant of granuloma annulare, and by others to be a distinct entity.
What treatment is available for granuloma annulare?
Options to consider include:
Topical corticosteroid ointment under occlusion
Intralesional steroid injections
Destruction by cryotherapy or laser ablation
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus and pimecrolimus).
Allopurinol (note: allopurinol has also be cited as a cause of disseminated granuloma annulare)
Combination of antibiotics once monthly: rifampicin, ofloxacin, minocycline
Photochemotherapy (PUVA)
UVA1 phototherapy (not available in New Zealand)
Photodynamic therapy
Biologics particularly TNFα inhibitors such as adalimumab and infliximab
Experimentally, oral and topical Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors including tofacitinib
What is the outlook for granuloma annulare?
Individual lesions of localised granuloma annulare tend to clear within a few months or years, although they may recur even at the same site. Generalised and atypical variants are more persistent, sometimes lasting decades.
Bourke J. Granulomatous disorders of the skin. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes] 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 97.1–8.
Garate D, Thang CJ, Schmidt M, et al. Granuloma annulare and the risk of autoimmune conditions: a multicentre retrospective cohort analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2024;191(4):626–627. PubMed
Piette EW, Rosenbach M. Granuloma annulare: pathogenesis, disease associations and triggers, and therapeutic options. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75(3):467–79. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2015.03.055. PubMed
Piette EW, Rosenbach M. Granuloma annulare: clinical and histologic variants, epidemiology, and genetics. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75(3):457–65. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2015.03.054. PubMed
Wang J, Khachemoune A. Granuloma annulare: a focused review of therapeutic options. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2018;19(3):333–44. doi:10.1007/s40257-017-0334-5. PubMed
Skin signs of systemic disease
Granuloma annulare pathology
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Granuloma annulare — Medscape Reference
Granuloma annulare — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Granulomatous Cheilitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/granulomatous-cheilitis]
Granulomatous cheilitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Granulomatous cheilitis
Granulomatous cheilitis — extra information
235136001, 215617000, 3777007, 235048000
Granulomatous cheilitis
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003.
What is granulomatous cheilitis?
Granulomatous cheilitis refers to an uncommon condition in which there is lumpy swelling of the lips. It is also known as cheilitis granulomatosa or Miescher cheilitis. It is part of the spectrum of orofacial granulomatosis including Miescher-Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (granulomatous cheilitis, facial palsy and fissuring of the tongue).
Who gets granulomatous cheilitis?
Granulomatous cheilitis is rare. It may occur in people of any race, sex and age, although onset is usually in early adulthood.
What is the cause of granulomatous cheilitis?
The causes of granulomatous cheilitis include:
Orofacial granulomatosis
Cancer or infection resulting in obstruction of lymphatics around the lips
What are the signs and symptoms of granulomatous cheilitis?
Recurrent attacks of granulomatous cheilitis may occur within days or even years after the first episode. At each episode, the swelling may become larger, more persistent and eventually become permanent. At this time the lips may crack, bleed and heal leaving a reddish-brown colour with scaling. This can be painful. Eventually, the lip takes on the consistency of hard rubber.
Granulomatous cheilitis Granulomatous cheilitis Granulomatous cheilitis
Other symptoms that may accompany granulomatous cheilitis include:
Fever, headache and visual disturbances
How is the diagnosis of granulomatous cheilitis made?
The diagnosis is often suspected clinically. Skin biopsy of the affected tissue shows characteristic histopathology, in which there are granulomas, i.e. a mixed inflammatory cell infiltration, in the dermis (the deeper layer of the skin).
What treatment is available?
If it is related to an allergy, responsible dietary components or causative substances should be avoided longterm. If there is an underlying disease, systemic treatment for this may also reduce the swelling of the lips.
Topical corticosteroids
Long term anti-inflammatory antibiotics, such as a six to twelve-month course of tetracycline, erythromycin or penicillin
Intralesional corticosteroids injected into the lips to reduce swelling. Injections need to be repeated every few months.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Mast cell stabilisers such as ketotifen
Book: Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Sixth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Orofacial granulomatosis
Orofacial manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease
Cheilitis Granulomatosa (Miescher-Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome) — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Granulomatous Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/granulomatous-dermatitis]
Granulomatous dermatitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Granulomatous dermatitis
Granulomatous dermatitis — extra information
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis, Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis, Interstitial granulomatous drug reaction, Reactive granulomatous dermatitis
Granulomatous dermatitis
Author: Dr Susan Simpkin, Dermatology Registrar, Green Lane Clinical Centre, Auckland, New Zealand, 2012.
Diagnosis - interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Introduction - Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis
Diagnosis - palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis
Clinical associations
Interstitial granulomatous drug reaction
What is granulomatous dermatitis?
Granulomatous dermatitis describes several disorders characterised by their histological appearance.
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis (IGD)
Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis (PNGD)
Interstitial granulomatous drug reaction (IGDR)
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis is a rare skin disorder in which there is a particular pattern of granulomatous inflammation.
The classic original clinical description of interstitial granulomatous dermatitis was of linear erythematous palpable cords on the lateral aspects of the trunk, called 'the rope sign'. However, several different types of rash have since been described with the same histological appearance.
What are the clinical features of interstitial granulomatous dermatitis?
The features of interstitial granulomatous dermatitis are variable.
Red or skin-coloured patches, papules and plaques
The shape of the lesions may be round, annular or cord-like.
Lesions wax and wane, and may vary in size and shape over days to months.
They are usually symptomless, but some patients complain of mild itch or burning sensation.
The lesions tend to be symmetrically distributed on the trunk, but proximal limbs may also be affected.
It most commonly affects middle-aged women.
Many affected patients also suffer from autoimmune disease.
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
How is interstitial granulomatous dermatitis diagnosed?
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis is diagnosed by a pathologist on examining a skin biopsy. The characteristic histological features of interstitial granulomatous dermatitis are:
Dense histiocytic inflammation in the reticular (lower) dermis
Sparse neutrophils and eosinophils
Perivascular and interstitial lymphocytes
Interstitial histiocytes (between the collagen bundles) or palisaded histiocytes (lined up perpendicular to fragmented central collagen).
Focal degeneration of collagen, which may be surrounded by space (floating sign)
How does interstitial granulomatous dermatitis compare to granuloma annulare?
Granuloma annulare and interstitial granulomatous dermatitis may appear similar clinically and histologically. Granuloma annulare also presents with papules and plaques, but these are typically on the back of the hands or feet, whereas the trunk is a more common site for interstitial granulomatous dermatitis. Granuloma annulare is less often associated with autoimmune diseases.
The characteristic histological features of granuloma annulare are:
Histiocytes located in the upper dermis
Rare or absent neutrophils and eosinophils
Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis
Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis was first described as crusted umbilicated papules on the elbows arising in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (Winkelmann granuloma) and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome).
Several different types of rash have been described with the same histological appearance including annular plaques on the trunk. Lesions are often tender and may ulcerate.
How is palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis diagnosed?
Palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis is diagnosed on skin biopsy. The characteristic histological features of palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis are:
Intense neutrophilic infiltrate and nuclear dust
Interstitial histiocytic infiltrate
Collagen degeneration
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Variable histological appearance depending on the stage of the eruption.
Palisading granulomas seen have also been described as miniature ‘Churg-Strauss granulomas’ or flame figures, with degenerated collagen enveloped by eosinophils resembling a flame. Flame figures are also seen in the pathology of Wells syndrome.
What are the clinical associations of granulomatous dermatitis?
Autoimmune diseases and conditions
Both forms of granulomatous dermatitis have often arisen in people with other conditions considered autoimmune in origin, implying an immune-complex mechanism may be involved in the pathogenesis [2]. These have included the following conditions.
The systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Primary antiphospholipid syndrome
Churg-Strauss syndrome
In a literature review of 15 patients with interstitial granulomatous dermatitis, autoantibodies identified on blood testing included rheumatoid factor (RhF), antinuclear factor (ANA), thyroglobulin, SS-A Histone, DNA histone and ANCA [4].
There are some reports of association of malignancy with interstitial granulomatous dermatitis. In one case, the lesions cleared after lung cancer was treated [5]. Rare associations of granulomatous dermatitis with leukaemia [6], lymphoma, breast cancer, hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and endometrial neoplasia have been reported.
How is granulomatous dermatitis treated?
Granulomatous dermatitis typically flares and remits. Successful treatments have included:
One case associated with SLE responded well to systemic steroids after 15 days [2].
Although tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors have been recently described as inducing interstitial granulomatous dermatitis [7], etanercept has been used in interstitial granulomatous dermatitis associated with rheumatoid arthritis with complete skin clearance and improvement in arthritis [8].
Interstitial granulomatous drug reaction
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis induced by medications is known as an interstitial granulomatous drug reaction. It is thought to be a distinct clinical and pathological entity. It presents as annular plaques, and nodules on the trunk, arms, medial thighs and skin folds. The rash resolves when the responsible drug is withdrawn.
How is an interstitial granulomatous drug reaction diagnosed?
Interstitial granulomatous drug reaction is diagnosed by skin biopsy. The characteristic histological features of interstitial granulomatous drug reaction are:
Basal epidermal cell vacuolisation
Lichenoid changes with eosinophils
Absence of neutrophils
Medications that have been reported to be implicated in interstitial granulomatous drug eruption include:
TNF-alpha inhibitors (infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept) [7]
Calcium channel blockers
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Lipid-lowering agents
Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors)
Anticonvulsants [4].
García-Rabasco A, Esteve-Martínez A, Zaragoza-Ninet V, Sánchez-Carazo JL, Alegre-de-Miquel V. Interstitial Granulomatous Dermatitis in a Patient With Lupus Erythematosus. Am J Dermatopathol 2011; 33(8):871–2. Journal
Blaise S, Salameire D, Carpentier PH. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis: a misdiagnosed cutaneous form of systemic lupus erythematosus? Clin Exp Dermatol 2008; 33: 712–4. PubMed
Peroni A, Colato C, Schena D, Gisondi P, Girolomoni G. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis: a distinct clinical entity with characteristic histological and clinical pattern. Br J Dermatol. 2012; 66(4):775–83. PubMed
Verneuil L, Dompmartin A, Comoz F, Pasquier CJ, Leroy D. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis with cutaneous cords and arthritis: A disorder associated with autoantibodies. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001; 45: 286-91. PubMed
Schreckenberg C, Asch PH, Sibilia J, Walter S, Lipsker D, Heid E, et al. Dermatite granulomateuse interstitielle et polyarthrite rhumatoïde paranéoplasiques révélatrices d’un cancer du poumon. Ann Dermatol Venereol 1998; 125: 585-8. PubMed
Swing DC, Sheehan DJ, Sangüeza OP, Woodruff RW. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis secondary to acute promyelocytic leukemia. Am J Dermatopathol 2008; 30 (2): 197–9. PubMed
Deng A, Harvey V, Sina B, Strobel D, Badros A et al. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis associated with the use of tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors. Arch Dermatol. 2006; 142: 198–202. PubMed
Zoli A, Massi G, Pinnelli M, Cuccio C, Castri F et al. Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis in rheumatoid arthritis responsive to etanercept. Clin Rheumatol (2010); 29: 99–101. PubMed
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis pathology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Guttate Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/guttate-psoriasis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Guttate psoriasis — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Last Reviewed: April, 2026
Authors: Dr Amy Stanway, Department of Dermatology, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2004. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. DermNet Update October 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is guttate psoriasis?
Guttate psoriasis is a form of acute psoriasis described as a shower of small, pink-red, scaly ‘raindrops’ that has fallen over the body.
Guttate psoriasis Guttate psoriasis Guttate psoriasis
Who gets guttate psoriasis?
Guttate psoriasis tends to affect children and young adults; it is the second most common form of psoriasis in children after chronic plaque psoriasis. Both sexes and all races can develop guttate psoriasis. It is often the first presentation of psoriasis for an individual, but can also be seen in those with known chronic psoriasis.
What causes guttate psoriasis?
Guttate psoriasis typically develops 1–2 weeks after a streptococcal infection of the upper respiratory tract, particularly tonsillitis, or other sites such as perianal streptococcal dermatitis. Beta-haemolytic streptococci can directly stimulate skin-homing T-cell proliferation in the tonsils.
Guttate psoriasis has been reported to follow SARS-CoV-2 infection (COVID-19) and other viral infections such as coxsackievirus. [see Enteroviral infections]
What are the clinical features of guttate psoriasis?
Acute onset over days
Numerous small patches (<1 cm)
Pink, scaly, thin patches or plaques of psoriasis
Scale can be subtle in early lesions
Widespread lesions predominantly over the trunk and limbs
Lesions on the face, scalp, and ears tend to be faint and short-lived
Dermoscopy of guttate psoriasis
Uniformly distributed red dotted vessels
Diffuse white-grey scale
Bright red, dull red, or pink background
These dermoscopy features are diagnostic and are seen in all skin types.
What are the complications of guttate psoriasis?
Psychosocial effects and impaired quality of life
Complications of psoriasis eg, metabolic syndrome, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [see Liver problems and psoriasis]
Dyspigmentation in skin of colour
How is guttate psoriasis diagnosed?
Guttate psoriasis is a clinical diagnosis, aided by dermoscopy, which can be confirmed on skin biopsy.
Examination and investigations should include a search for streptococcal infection.
Swabs for bacteriology
Blood tests — Anti-streptolysin O titre (ASOT), anti-DNase B titre.
What is the differential diagnosis for guttate psoriasis?
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica
What is the treatment for guttate psoriasis?
Treatment of an associated active streptococcal infection with antibiotics
However, antibiotics seldom help the rash of guttate psoriasis
Narrowband UVB phototherapy
Tonsillectomy for recurrent episodes
Recent opinion has questioned whether introduction of advanced therapy may alter the long term course of guttate psoriasis. Both ixekizumab and secikinumab induce rapid control of guttate psoriasis. Long-term follow-up is required to ascertain if this reduces the risk of chronic plaque psoriasis developing.
What is the outcome for guttate psoriasis?
Guttate psoriasis often clears within 3-4 months, even without treatment. Patients with proven streptococcal infection triggering the guttate psoriasis have a good prognosis. However, it may recur with another episode of streptococcal infection.
Dupire G, Droitcourt C, Hughes C, Le Cleach L. Antistreptococcal interventions for guttate and chronic plaque psoriasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;3(3):CD011571. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011571.pub2. Journal
Gananandan K, Sacks B, Ewing I. Guttate psoriasis secondary to COVID-19. BMJ Case Rep. 2020;13(8):e237367. doi:10.1136/bcr-2020-237367. Journal
Garritsen FM, Kraag DE, de Graaf M. Guttate psoriasis triggered by perianal streptococcal infection. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2017;42(5):536–8. doi:10.1111/ced.13129. PubMed
Jindal R, Chauhan P, Sethi S. Dermoscopic characterization of guttate psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, and pityriasis lichenoides chronica in dark skin phototypes: an observational study. Dermatol Ther. 2021;34(1):e14631. doi:10.1111/dth.14631. PubMed
Kridin, K., de Luca, D. A., Mruwat, N., Ludwig, R. J., & Thaçi, D. (2025). The risk of different subtypes of psoriasis following an episode of guttate psoriasis. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 92(2), 315–316. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2024.04.082. Journal
Makhecha M, Singh T, Khatib Y. Dermoscopy differentiates guttate psoriasis from a mimicker-pityriasis rosea. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2021;11(1):e2021138. doi:10.5826/dpc.1101a138. PubMed Central
Maruani A, Samimi M, Stembridge N, et al. Non-antistreptococcal interventions for acute guttate psoriasis or an acute guttate flare of chronic psoriasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;4(4):CD011541. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011541.pub2. Journal
Pfingstler LF, Maroon M, Mowad C. Guttate psoriasis outcomes. Cutis. 2016;97(2):140–4. PubMed
Rouai M, Rabhi F, Mansouri N, Jaber K, Dhaoui R. New-onset guttate psoriasis secondary to COVID-19. Clin Case Rep. 2021;9(7):e04542. doi:10.1002/ccr3.4542. Journal
Paediatric psoriasis
Streptococcal skin infection
Treatment of psoriasis
Navigating Psoriasis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Guttate psoriasis — Medscape
MyPsoriasis.co.nz — Information for New Zealand patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, sponsored by AbbVie
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hair Loss]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hair-loss]
Hair loss, balding, hair shedding, alopecia
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Hair loss — extra information
ED70.Z, ED70.Y, ED70.5Y, ED70.5Z
56317004, 267808001, 238734009, 201138007, 247541004, 400088006, 23872500
Author: Honorary Associate Profesor Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Further updates: December 2015 and May 2023.
The medical term for hair loss is alopecia. There may be associated scalp disease or scarring.
Alopecia may be localised or diffuse.
It can affect the scalp or other parts of the body, such as the beard, eyebrows, and eyelashes.
It may be due to hair shedding, poor quality hair, or hair thinning.
There may be areas of skin that are completely bald.
There may be associated skin disease or scarring.
Unfortunately, hair loss may not be easy to remedy.
As all our hair follicles are formed during fetal growth, it is inevitable that we will notice hair loss of some kind in later life.
Hair loss occurs in:
People with any colour or type of hair.
Hair loss can be an isolated problem or associated with another disease or condition. It can be temporary or permanent, depending on the cause.
Hair grows on most parts of the skin surface, except palms, soles, lips and eyelids. Hair thickness and length varies according to the site.
Vellus hair is fine, light in colour, and short in length
Terminal or androgenic hair is thicker, darker and longer
Hair growth follows a cycle. However, these phases are not synchronised, and any hair may be at a particular phase at random.
The three main phases of the hair cycle are:
Anagen: actively growing hair, most of them
Catagen: in-between phase of 2–3 weeks when growth stops and the follicle shrinks, 1–3% of hairs
Telogen: resting phase for 1–4 months, up to 10% of hairs in a normal scalp.
Hair length depends on the duration of anagen. Short hairs (eyelashes, eyebrows, hair on arms and legs) have a short anagen phase of around one month. Anagen lasts up to 6 years or longer in scalp hair.
Image © 1998 Merck Sharpe and Dohme (with permission)
What causes hair loss?
Hair loss can be due to:
The decreased growth of the hair: anagen hair loss
Increased shedding of the hair: telogen hair loss
Conversion of thick terminal hairs to thin vellus hairs; male and female pattern hair loss
Congenital or acquired hair shaft abnormalities
An inflammatory skin disease that damages or destroys the hair bulb.
What are the clinical features of hair loss?
The features of hair loss depend on the cause. Actual symptoms such as itch and soreness are generally absent unless caused by accompanying inflammatory skin disease. However, a burning, prickly discomfort known as trichodynia may accompany hair shedding.
Anagen hair is tapered or broken-off. Anagen is variable in duration. Children with otherwise normal hair but that cannot grow their hair long may have short anagen syndrome.
Anagen shedding is known as anagen effluvium and has a sudden onset.
Anagen effluvium is caused by:
Autoimmune disease, including severe diffuse alopecia areata
Medications, especially cytotoxic/chemotherapy drugs
An inherited or congenital condition, such as loose anagen syndrome
Short broken hairs and empty follicles may be observed. If caused by a drug or toxin, hair growth can return to normal within 3–6 months of its withdrawal.
Hair shedding during chemotherapy Hair lost through chemotherapy Alopecia areata
Telogen hair has a bulb at the end (club hair). Excessive shedding is known as telogen effluvium. It occurs 2–6 months after an event that stops active hair growth.
Telogen effluvium is caused by:
A surgical operation, illness or psychological stress
Medications, including contraceptives, anticoagulants, anticonvulsants.
Sometimes there appears to be no recognisable cause for telogen effluvium, and shedding can continue for years (chronic telogen effluvium). Scalp hair continues to grow but has a shorter natural length than normal.
Telogen effluvium Telogen effluvium
Pattern hair loss (androgenetic alopecia)
Pattern hair loss is due to genetic programming or hormonal influences. It is also called androgenetic alopecia because it is influenced by androgens.
Male pattern alopecia affects vertex and temporal scalp.
Female pattern alopecia is less pronounced and affects the anterior scalp.
Male pattern balding Female pattern balding Severe female pattern balding
Hair shaft abnormalities
Hair shaft defects can be inherited and congenital, or acquired due to disease or injury (eg, excessive brushing, hair pulling [trichotillomania], hairdryer heat, relaxing chemicals, bleach). See African hair practices.
Hair shaft abnormalities are diagnosed by dermatoscopy or microscopic examination of the hair, and sometimes by scanning electron microscopy. They include:
Fractures: trichorrhexis nodosa, trichoschisis, trichoclasis (trichothiodystrophy)
Irregularities: trichorrhexis invaginata (seen with ichthyosis in Netherton syndrome), Marie-Unna hypotrichosis (uncombable hair), pili bifurcati, pili annulati, pseudopili annulati, monilethrix (beaded hair), pseudomonilethrix
Coiling and twisting: pili torti (twisted hair), woolly hair, trichonodosis (knotted hair).
Dermatological disease
Conditions resulting in reversible patchy hair thinning, poor hair quality and bald patches include:
Localised alopecia areata
A localised infection, such as tinea capitis
Severe local skin disease, such as psoriasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, cutaneous lupus erythematosus, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
Generalised skin disease (erythroderma).
Hair loss due to scalp conditions
Tinea capitis Psoriasis © R Suhonen Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Systemic diseases resulting in reversible patchy hair thinning, poor hair quality and bald patches include:
Thyroid hormone deficiency
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Severe acute or chronic illness.
Destructive inflammatory skin diseases
Inflammation in the dermis or subcutaneous tissue may injure the hair follicle resulting in localised bald patches in which there are no visible follicles; this is called scarring alopecia or cicatricial alopecia.
Traumatic causes of scarring alopecia may be due to:
Traction (tight curls)
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia.
Traumatic forms of alopecia
Trichotillomania Trichotillomania Traction alopecia
Infections causing scarring alopecia include:
Bacterial infection: boils and abscesses (Staphylococcus aureus)
Fungal infection: kerion (inflammatory tinea capitis)
Viral infection: shingles (herpes zoster).
Inflammatory skin diseases causing scarring alopecia include:
Folliculitis decalvans
Dissecting cellulitis
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Localised scleroderma.
Pseudopelade of Brocq is a condition in which there are localised areas of the scalp in which hair follicles have disappeared without visible inflammation.
Discoid lupus erythematosus Folliculitis decalvans Lichen planopilaris
Complications of hair loss
Whatever the type of hair loss, it may be extremely distressing and embarrassing, reducing the quality of life and causing psychosocial problems. Loss of normal scalp hair increases the risk of:
How is hair loss diagnosed?
A careful history and full skin examination can generally result in the correct diagnosis. Additional tests may include:
Hair pull test to determine the relative proportion of anagen and telogen hairs
Wood lamp examination
Swabs of pustules for bacterial and viral culture
Skin scrapings and hair clippings for mycology
Blood tests for haematology, thyroid function, serology.
What is the treatment for hair loss?
Treatment depends on the diagnosis.
Infections should be treated.
Deficiencies should be remedied.
Causative drugs may be discontinued.
Inflammation can be suppressed.
Treatment may be available for specific conditions.
A systematic review of 30 studies suggests a discussion on nutritional supplementation should be considered between patient and physician.
For specific treatments, see individual pages for the different types of alopecia.
How can hair loss be prevented?
Most types of hair loss cannot be actively prevented. However, it is prudent to avoid injury to the hair shaft.
Dry hair naturally or with a hairdryer on a cool setting
Minimise chemical treatments or use them infrequently
Use loose hairstyles to avoid traction injury
What is the outlook for hair loss?
The outlook for hair loss depends on the diagnosis. Scarring alopecia is permanent.
Anagen and telogen shedding generally stops in time
Early treatment of pattern alopecia may reduce the speed of thinning
Treatment of any inflammatory disease may be successful
Hair loss can be disguised or covered
Hair replacement techniques include wigs, hairpieces and surgery.
Diagnosing and Treating Hair Loss – Am Fam Physician. 2009 Aug 15;80(4):356-362.
Drake L, Reyes-Hadsall S, Martinez J, Heinrich C, Huang K, Mostaghimi A. Evaluation of the Safety and Effectiveness of Nutritional Supplements for Treating Hair Loss: A Systematic Review. JAMA Dermatol. 2023;159(1):79–86. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.4867 Journal
Male pattern hair loss
Female pattern hair loss
Short anagen syndrome
African hair practices
Psychological effects of hair loss
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
False eyelashes and eyebrows
Hair Diseases and Hair Loss – Medline Plus
Cicatricial Alopecia Research Foundation
Help with Hair Loss – Am Fam Physician 2009; 80: 373–4.
Androgenetic alopecia
Tufted Hair Folliculitis
Menkes Kinky Hair Disease
Trichorrhexis Invaginata (Netherton Syndrome or Bamboo Hair)
Hair Loss – emedicinehealth
Hair loss - American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Halo Naevus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/halo-naevus]
Halo moles (halo nevi)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Halo naevus — extra information
Halo mole, Sutton naevus, Leukoderma acquisitum centrifugum, Halo naevus
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated January 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is a halo naevus?
A halo naevus (US spelling, nevus) is an otherwise normal mole with a white ring, or halo, around it. The central dark brown naevus fades from dark brown to light brown to pink, eventually disappearing completely.
Halo naevus is also known as:
Halo melanocytic naevus
Leukoderma acquisitum centrifugum.
Halo naevus Halo naevus
Who gets halo naevi?
Halo naevi (US plural, nevi) are not uncommon, with an estimated prevalence of 1% of the white-skinned population. They are usually seen in healthy children or young adults of either sex. They can occur at an older age too.
Halos can be seen as part of a more generalised pigment loss, vitiligo, and halo naevi may also be associated with another autoimmune disease.
They may rarely arise as a reaction to advanced melanoma and in patients with metastatic melanoma treated with targeted therapy or immune checkpoint inhibitors such as pembrolizumab or nivolumab.
What is the cause of halo naevi?
Why halo naevi develop is not fully understood. They are currently classified as autoimmune in origin.
The onset of a halo naevus may be triggered by sunburn or local trauma, which causes the mole to be recognised by the immune system as foreign, resulting in an attack by circulating antibodies and CD8+ T lymphocytes. The reaction also affects the normal skin around the mole, which also has pigment cells in it, causing depigmentation.
Development of halo naevi has also been associated with psychosocial stress.
What are the clinical features of halo naevi?
A solitary halo naevus or multiple halo naevi are most often found on the trunk. They are less common on the head and are rare on the limbs. The affected naevi are dermal naevi that are congenital or have arisen during childhood. Halo naevi may follow the Koebner phenomenon, arising within a mole that has been injured in some way.
There are four stages of a halo naevus. It may take several years to complete the cycle. Multiple halo naevi can be at different stages.
Stage 1: A rim of pale skin surrounds a mole
Stage 2: The mole may become pinker or less pigmented, and fades away
Stage 3: A circular or oval area of depigmentation persists
Stage 4: The affected skin gradually returns to its normal colour
Halo naevi in different stages
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
How is a halo naevus diagnosed?
Halo naevus is a clinical diagnosis. Dermoscopy may be used to evaluate the structure and colour of the naevus.
A full skin examination should be performed (especially in adults), as rarely, halo naevi can be triggered by the presence of a melanoma elsewhere.
Occasionally, if it has atypical features such as irregularity in structure or colour, excision of a solitary halo naevus is recommended to make sure it is benign. Histology reveals a band-like lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the dermis under the naevus.
Dermoscopy of halo naevi
Halo naevus dermoscopy Halo naevus dermoscopy Halo naevus dermoscopy
What is the differential diagnosis for halo naevus?
The differential diagnosis of halo naevus includes:
Melanocytic naevus without halo
Recurrent naevus within a scar
Melanocytic naevus regressing through another pathway
Focal lichenoid reaction; a cluster of grey dots may be observed on dermoscopy.
Senescent involution; the naevus globally fades and shrinks without peripheral depigmentation
Melanoma with halo phenomenon or another form of regression
Depigmentation is focal and not round or oval in shape
Other features of melanoma are present, such as irregular structure and colour.
Solar lentigo or seborrhoeic keratosis undergoing regression.
Concerning lesions with depigmentation — all excised for histopathology
Recurrent naevus in scar (dermoscopy view) Atypical naevus with depigmentation Melanoma with depigmentation
What is the treatment of halo naevus?
Apart from an explanation, no treatment is normally required for a typical halo naevus.
The white skin of a halo naevus will burn particularly easily in the sun because it is missing protective melanin pigment. Cover up or apply sunscreen during summer to prevent sunburn.
Surgery is not usually necessary but may be recommended if there are atypical features such as irregularity in the structure of the naevus.
Weyant GW, Chung CG, Helm KF. Halo nevus: review of the literature and clinicopathologic findings. Int J Dermatol. 2015 Oct;54(10):e433-5. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12843. Epub 2015 Jul 3. Review. PubMed PMID: 26146814. PubMed.
Zhou H, Wu LC, Chen MK, Liao QM, Mao RX, Han JD. Factors Associated with Development of Vitiligo in Patients with Halo Nevus. Chin Med J (Engl). 2017 Nov 20;130(22):2703-2708. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.218011. PubMed PMID: 29133759; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5695056. PubMed Central.
Melanocytic nevi — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hand Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hand-dermatitis]
Hand dermatitis (hand eczema)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Hand dermatitis — extra information
L30.9, L25.9, L24.9, L23.9
EA85, EA85.0, EA85.1, EA85.20, EA85.2Y, EK02.12, EK00.Y
238539001, 238553001, 402224008, 238555008, 238556009, 402567004, 402587003, 402232000, 402225009, 402233005, 402226005, 402227001, 402572008, 238541000, 402291009,402290005, 402254003
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Karen Koch, Consultant Dermatologist, Donald Gordon Medical Clinic, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. March 2018. Minor update by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2024.
Differential diagnoses
What is hand dermatitis?
Hand dermatitis is a common acute or chronic eczematous disorder that affects the dorsal and palmar aspects of the hands due to a variety of causes.
Hand dermatitis is also known as hand eczema.
Palmar dermatitis Hyperkeratotic palmar eczema Thickening, dryness, and scale on the dorsal fingers
Who gets hand dermatitis?
Hand dermatitis is common, especially in young adult females, and accounts for 20–35% of all forms of dermatitis. It may occur at any age, including during childhood. It is particularly prevalent in people with a history of atopic dermatitis. [see also Atopic hand dermatitis]
Chronic hand dermatitis is estimated to affect 10–15% of the population and is a common cause of time lost from work.
What causes hand dermatitis?
Hand dermatitis often results from a combination of causes, including:
Genetic and unknown factors (constitutional hand dermatitis)
Hand dermatitis is frequently caused or aggravated by work when it is known as occupational dermatitis.
Irritants include water, detergents, solvents, acids, alkalis, cold, heat, friction, and desiccating dusts. These can damage the outer stratum corneum, removing lipids and disturbing the skin’s barrier function. Water loss and inflammation lead to further impairment of barrier function.
In atopic dermatitis, a deficiency in or defective function of the filaggrin protein in the stratum corneum leads to barrier dysfunction resulting in water loss and easy penetration by irritants and allergens [3].
What are the clinical features of hand dermatitis?
Hand dermatitis may affect the backs of the hands, the palms, or both. It can be very itchy, often with a burning sensation, and is sometimes painful. It has acute, relapsing, and chronic phases.
Acute hand dermatitis presents with:
Red macules, papules, and plaques
Blistering, weeping, crusting
Features of chronic hand dermatitis include:
There are various causes and clinical presentations of hand dermatitis.
Diffuse scale and redness on the palms due to eczema Infected hand dermatitis Hand dermatitis on the dorsal fingers in an atopic boy
Atopic hand dermatitis
Discoid eczema (nummular dermatitis) tends to affect the dorsal surfaces of the hands and fingers as circumscribed plaques. Other sites of the body may or may not be affected.
Vesicular hand dermatitis
Vesicular hand dermatitis is also known as pompholyx. Intensely itchy crops of skin-coloured blisters arise on the palms and the sides of the hands and fingers. Similar symptoms often affect the feet. It is likely this form of dermatitis is exacerbated by excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) such as in hot and/or humid weather and with emotional stress.
Chronic relapsing vesiculosquamous dermatitis
Chronic relapsing vesiculosquamous dermatitis is a common pattern of palmar and finger dermatitis, in which episodes of acute vesicular dermatitis are followed by chronic scaling and fissuring.
Hyperkeratotic hand dermatitis
Hyperkeratotic hand dermatitis is a chronic, dry, non-inflammatory palmar dermatitis. It can appear similar to palmar psoriasis but is less red and less well circumscribed.
Fingertip dermatitis
Fingertip dermatitis can be isolated to one or several fingers.
Repeated exposure to low-grade irritants such as water, soaps, and detergents leads to chronic cumulative irritant dermatitis.
Periodic flare-ups associated with certain tasks or places hours to days earlier
Irregular, asymmetrical distribution of the rash
Sharp border to the rash (eg, at the wrist, corresponding with the cuff of rubber glove).
What are the complications of hand dermatitis?
Bacterial skin infections (staphylococci and/or streptococci) can result in pustules, crusting, pain, and even limb lymphoedema.
Dermatitis at the ends of the fingers may result in deformed nails.
Dermatitis can spread to affect other sites, particularly the forearms and feet.
How is hand dermatitis diagnosed?
Hand dermatitis is usually straightforward to diagnose and classify by history and examination, considering:
Acute, relapsing, or chronic course
Past history of skin disease
Dermatitis on other sites
Occupation and hobbies.
However determining the cause of a hand dermatitis can be complicated as it may be multifactorial.
A punch biopsy and skin scrapings (mycology) may be necessary to exclude other causes of inflammation of the hands.
What is the differential diagnosis for hand dermatitis?
Psoriasis (symmetrical, well-circumscribed, red, scaly plaques)
Tinea manuum (unilateral or asymmetrical, peripheral scale).
Applying patch tests to the back Reading the patch tests - there are several positives Positive patch test reaction
What is the treatment for hand dermatitis?
Patients with all forms of hand dermatitis should be most particular to:
Use non-soap cleanserwhen washing hands, rinse carefully, and ensure hands are completely dry afterwards
Note that cream cleansers are not antimicrobial; soap and water or a sanitiser is needed for washing hands in order to destroy pathogens such as the SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible for COVID-19
Completely avoid allergens that have been identified by patch testing
Wear task-appropriate protective gloves
Apply thick emollients before work/school and reapply after washing or when the skin dries out (this can be 10–20 times in a day).
Vinyl gloves are less likely than rubber gloves to cause allergic reactions.
They must be scrupulously clean and should have no holes.
They should not be worn for long periods.
Sweating under the gloves aggravates dermatitis.
Lined gloves or inner cotton gloves improve comfort.
Cotton gloves may be useful for irritating dry work when a waterproof outer glove is not required.
Topical steroids reduce inflammation.
Use a potent topical steroid on dermatitis on the backs of the hands and an ultrapotent topical steroid on palms.
Cream formulation is usually best for vesicular hand dermatitis, and an ointment base for chronic dermatitis.
They should be applied to areas of active dermatitis once or twice daily for several weeks, then discontinued or frequency/potency reduced.
Short-term occlusion increases potency and is warranted if standard applications have not been effective.
Calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus and pimecrolimus) have some evidence to show efficacy in hand eczema and can be used as a steroid-sparing agent [4].
Oral alitretinoin and topical delgocitinib (pan-JAK inhibitor) have been approved for recalcitrant hand dermatitis in some countries. A trial comparing the two showed that topical delgocitinib was more effective and had fewer side effects.
Secondary bacterial infection may require an oral antibiotic, usually flucloxacillin.
Severe acute flares of hand dermatitis are treated with short course oral prednisone (systemic steroids) for 2–4 weeks.
Chronic intractable hand dermatitis may be treated with second-line agents such as azathioprine, methotrexate, ciclosporin, alitretinoin or phototherapy.
How can hand dermatitis be prevented?
What is the outlook for hand dermatitis?
With careful management, hand dermatitis usually recovers completely. A few days off work may be helpful. When occupational dermatitis is severe, it may not be possible to work for weeks or months. Occasionally a change of occupation is necessary.
Perry AD, Trafeli JP. Hand dermatitis: review of etiology, diagnosis, and treatment. J Am Board Fam Med. 2009;22(3):325–30. PubMed
McLean WH. Filaggrin failure - from ichthyosis vulgaris to atopic eczema and beyond. Br J Dermatol. 2016;175 Suppl 2:4–7. PubMed
Raja S, Raja A, Shuja MH, Ali A. Clinical benefits of delgocitinib cream for chronic hand eczema: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Dermatol Res. 2024;316(10):734. PubMed
Worm M, Thyssen JP, Schliemann S, et al. The pan-JAK inhibitor delgocitinib in a cream formulation demonstrates dose response in chronic hand eczema in a 16-week randomized phase IIb trial. Br J Dermatol. 2022;187(1):42–51. PubMed
Raja S, Raja A, Shuja MH, Ali A. Clinical benefits of delgocitinib cream for chronic hand eczema: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Dermatol Res. 2024;316(10):734. Published 2024 Nov 1. PubMed
Fingertip dermatitis
Atopic hand dermatitis
Gloves for hand protection
Hand care in healthcare workers
Emollients for eczema
Hyperkeratotic palmar dermatitis
Dermatitis online course for health professionals
Treatment of psychodermatological disorders
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Hand eczema — Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre, Australia
Chronic hand eczema — AHA! Swiss Allergy Centre
Hand dermatitis — British Association of Dermatologists
Dyshidrotic eczema — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hand Foot And Mouth Disease]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hand-foot-and-mouth-disease]
Hand, Foot, and Mouth disease (HFMD): Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Hand, foot, and mouth disease
Hand, foot, and mouth disease — extra information
Enteroviral vesicular syndrome, Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis, Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis with exanthem, Hand, foot, and mouth disease, Hand-foot-and-mouth disease
B08.4, B97.11, B34.1
266108008, 42067008, 69239002
Hand, foot, and mouth disease
August 2022Author: Dr Stanley Leong, Paediatric Registrar; Dr Caroline Mahon, Dermatologist, Christchurch Hospital, New ZealandPrevious contributors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (1998 and 2016); Dr Jannet Gomez (2016)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Advice on school leave
What is hand, foot, and mouth disease?
Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD or HFM) is a common, self-limiting, viral infection that causes blisters on the hands, feet, and inside or around the mouth. It mainly affects children under the age of 5 years.
HFMD, also called enteroviral vesicular stomatitis, occurs sporadically worldwide. Epidemics are most common during warm weather, usually in the late summer or early autumn.
It is important to note that HFMD is NOT related to foot and mouth disease of animals.
Who gets hand, foot, and mouth disease?
What causes hand, foot, and mouth disease?
Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis (HFMD) is usually caused by the Coxsackie virus, most commonly the A16 subtype. It may also be caused by other viruses such as:
Coxsackie A virus (5, 6, 7, 9, 10)
Coxsackie B virus (2, 5)
Enterovirus 71 infection is associated with more severe infections that may involve the heart, lungs, and can also cause inflammation of the lining of the brain (meningitis).
What are the clinical features of hand, foot, and mouth disease?
The illness usually begins with one or all of the following: fever, sore throat, loss of appetite, and lethargy. However, many children remain well in themselves despite the rash. The blisters usually appear 1–2 days following the fever.
The incubation period is typically 3–6 days and children remain infectious until the blisters have ruptured and healed (usually 7–10 days).
Skin findings typically include:
Blisters on the tops of the hands, feet and/or palms, and soles. Lesions usually:
Evolve over time from flat pink macules to small, elongated, red-greyish blisters
Are often oval rather than round
Peel off within a week, without leaving a scar.
Small blisters (vesicles) and ulcers may develop in and/or around the lips and mouth and the back of the throat. These can sometimes be very painful. Oral intake may be significantly impacted, especially in infants and younger children.
In children with eczema, or past eczema, blisters, flat red macules and papules may develop over other areas of the skin, especially the buttocks and sometimes on the arms, legs, and genital skin.
Atypical HFMD can result in a more widespread rash and blistering. Features may include:
Red, crusted macules and papules without blistering
Large blisters (bulla)
Targetoid (bulls-eye, or target-shaped) lesions
Involvement of atypical or unusual sites such as the ears.
Hand, foot, and mouth disease Stomatitis in HFMD Oval vesicles on the sole in hand, foot and mouth disease Nail changes noted 6 weeks after hand and mouth blister resolution Oral hand, foot, and mouth disease
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
In children with pre-existing eczema (atopic dermatitis), HFMD lesions may be localised in eczematous areas (eczema coxsackium).
What are the complications of hand, foot, and mouth disease?
Severe complications are very uncommon in people that are otherwise healthy. They include:
Dehydration due to inadequate fluid intake. This can cause significant problems in younger children.
Transverse lines in the nail plate that slowly move outwards
Serious enteroviral infection can lead to:
Widespread blistering
Inflammation of the brain and or the lining of the brain (meningoencephalitis)
Loss of nerve function in a limb (acute flaccid paralysis)
Pulmonary oedema and pneumonia
Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis
In pregnancy, viruses that cause HFMD can cause first trimester spontaneous miscarriage or intrauterine growth restriction
Meningoencephalitis, thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, cardiomyopathy and hepatitis in the newborn have rarely been described.
How is hand, foot, and mouth disease diagnosed?
HFMD is usually diagnosed clinically. Cutaneous lesions are typically distributed symmetrically over common sites of the skin such as the hands, feet, and in and around the mouth in a child.
Other diagnostic tools include:
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing
Viral DNA may be detected from nasopharyngeal, (throat or nose), swabs and stool specimens.
Skin biopsy of a blister
Very rarely indicated.
Shows acral skin with lymphocytic infiltrates at the epidermis.
The infiltrate is associated with keratinocyte apoptosis in early lesions.
See hand, foot, and mouth disease pathology for more information.
What is the differential diagnosis for hand, foot, and mouth disease?
Bacterial infections: such as Group A Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus, may cause similar blistering skin lesions, eg, bullous impetigo.
Other viral infections such as human parechoviruses, herpes simplex virus, adenoviruses, varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and human herpesvirus 6 and 7.
Bullous insect bite reactions may also present on the hands and feet in children.
What is the treatment for hand, foot, and mouth disease?
Specific treatment is not usually required for HFMD, and the focus is symptomatic care. HFMD rarely causes serious complications. Antibiotics do not work and should not be given to children with HFMD.
No vaccines or specific antiviral medications are available.
Simple analgesia such as paracetamol or ibuprofen as needed.
Antiseptic mouthwashes or topical soothing agents (eg, lignocaine) can be used in children with painful oral/palatal ulcers.
Aspirin should not be used routinely due to the risk of Reye syndrome.
Constantly offer the child sips of water/juice to prevent dehydration.
If oral intake is poor, nasogastric or intravenous fluids may be indicated.
Leave blisters to dry naturally.
Do not pierce/rupture the blisters to reduce contagion.
Keep the blisters clean and apply non-adherent dressings to erosions.
The blisters remain infective until they have dried, which is usually within a few days. However, the virus sheds through faecal stools and these remain infective for up to a month after the illness. Therefore, it is impractical to keep children who are well away from school.
General preventative measures include:
This includes touching their blisters, helping them to blow their nose and changing nappies or helping with toileting.
Minimise sharing personal items such as cutlery, drinking cups, towels, toothbrushes, and clothing.
What is the outcome for hand, foot, and mouth disease?
HFMD infection is usually mild and complete resolution is seen within 7–10 days. Infection often results in long-term immunity to the specific virus, however a second episode can occur following infection with a different member of the enterovirus group.
Fong SY, Mori D, Rundi C et al. A five-year retrospective study on the epidemiology of hand, foot and mouth disease in Sabah, Malaysia. Scientific Reports, 2021. doi: PubMed Central
Frydenberg A, Starr M. Theme: School contagions: Hand, foot and mouth disease. Australian Family Physician, Vol. 32, No.8, August 2003. Journal
Hong J, Liu F, Qi H, et al. Changing epidermiology of hand, foot and mouth disease in China, 2013-2019: a population-based study. The Lancet Regional Health Western Pacific, 2022. doi: Journal
Saguil A, Kane SF, Lauters R, Mercado MG. Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease: Rapid Evidence Review. Am Fam Physician. 2019;100(7):408–414. Journal
Hand, foot, and mouth disease pathology
Enteroviral infections
Blistering skin conditions
Viral skin infections
Hand, foot and mouth disease — Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne
Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease (HFMD) — Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Hand, foot and mouth disease — raisingchildren.net.au
Hand, foot and mouth disease — Health Navigator New Zealand
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Heberden Bouchard Nodes]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/heberden-bouchard-nodes]
Heberden and Bouchard nodes
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Heberden and Bouchard nodes
Heberden and Bouchard nodes — extra information
Heberden node, Bouchard node
M15.1, M15.2, M71.349
371598009, 20243008, 404098005
Heberden and Bouchard nodes
Author: Adjunct Assoc. Prof. Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, March 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What are Heberden and Bouchard nodes?
A Heberden node describes a bony swelling of the distal interphalangeal finger joint. It is a sign of osteoarthritis, a degenerative joint disease.
A Bouchard node is a similar swelling affecting the proximal interphalangeal finger joint [1].
Heberden node Heberden node
Who gets Heberden and Bouchard nodes?
Heberden and Bouchard nodes are equally common in males and females of all races.
They are common in older individuals. However, more than half of the patients with Heberden nodes and osteoarthritis are diagnosed before the age of 65 years [2].
Bouchard nodes are less common than Heberden nodes and are associated with more severe arthritis.
The presence of the nodes is strongly familial [1].
More than 60% of patients with osteoarthritis of the knees have Heberden nodes [3].
What causes Heberden and Bouchard nodes?
A Heberden or Bouchard node is due to an exostosis — a bony enlargement — and a sign of osteoarthritis. The cause of osteoarthritis is not fully understood. There is a genetic predisposition to the development of nodes [1].
Osteoarthritis is considered a sign of 'wear and tear' in a joint. The earliest structural abnormalities in osteoarthritis are evident in the ligaments supporting the joints [4]. The cartilage of the joints breaks down, osteophytes (bone spurs) develop, and the ends of the bones rub against each other.
Inflammation in the nodes is due to friction-induced capsular rupture and synovial leakage [1].
What are the clinical features of Heberden and Bouchard nodes?
A Heberden node is a bony swelling of a distal interphalangeal joint and a Bouchard node is a bony swelling of the proximal interphalangeal joint.
Bony swelling can affect either the lateral or midline aspects of the joint or both [1].
Multiple nodes can be present on one digit [2].
The nodes can affect one or many digits.
Nodes most often affect the middle finger or thumb of both hands.
They may grow slowly or rapidly.
The nodes may become inflamed and painful but are often painless and unnoticed.
A Heberden node may be associated with a digital myxoid pseudocyst.
As well as affecting fingers, osteoarthritis causes discomfort, pain, and stiffness in other joints of the hands, knees, hips, and spine.
Heberden node and myxoid pseudocyst
How are Heberden and Bouchard nodes diagnosed?
The diagnosis of Heberden or Bouchard node is usually made clinically due to their characteristic appearance. Imaging may be performed on the affected digit.
Ultrasound scanning reveals osteophytes, synovitis, and bony erosions of osteoarthritis [5].
A plain X-ray of the affected joint may show interphalangeal osteophytes, although correlation is poor with clinical Heberden nodes. Osteophytes are more common in patients with inflammatory arthritis [6].
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may confirm the diagnosis of arthritis in the affected digit. Heberden and Bouchard node formation is associated with soft tissue bulging through the capsule between the dorsal tendons and collateral ligaments. Ligamentous change can be seen in adjacent but clinically normal joints [7].
Histological examination of Heberden or Bouchard node is not commonly undertaken. It may show the presence of osteophytes and dorsal contractures.
X-ray of Heberden and Bouchard nodes
What is the differential diagnosis for Heberden and Bouchard nodes?
The differential diagnosis of a Heberden or Bouchard node includes [5]:
Swelling of the proximal interphalangeal joint due to rheumatoid arthritis
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions
Synovial ganglion cyst
Giant cell tumour of tendon sheath
Cholesterol deposits [8].
How are Heberden and Bouchard nodes treated?
There is no specific treatment to repair a Heberden or Bouchard node.
Treatment for osteoarthritis may include lifestyle changes such as exercise, weight loss, low-inflammatory diet, heat bags, and cold compresses.
Medical treatments include pain relief and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [9,10].
Some patients with osteoarthritis may require surgery to repair or replace one or more joints.
Alexander CJ. Heberden's and Bouchard's nodes. Ann Rheum Dis. 1999;58(11):675-8. doi:10.1136/ard.58.11.675. PMID: 10531070; PMCID: PMC1752800 (PDF).
Kumar NM, Hafezi-Nejad N, Guermazi A, et al. Brief Report: Association of quantitative and topographic assessment of Heberden's nodes with knee osteoarthritis: data from the osteoarthritis initiative. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018;70(8):1234-9. doi:10.1002/art.40463. PMID: 29471581.
McGonagle D, Tan AL, Grainger AJ, Benjamin M. Heberden's nodes and what Heberden could not see: the pivotal role of ligaments in the pathogenesis of early nodal osteoarthritis and beyond. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008;47(9):1278-85. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/ken093. PMID: 18390583.
Tamborrini G, Gengenbacher M, Bianchi S. Knuckle pads - a rare finding. J Ultrason. 2012 Dec;12(51):493-8. doi: 10.15557/JoU.2012.0037. PMCID: PMC4603232.
Cicuttini FM, Baker J, Hart DJ, Spector TD. Relation between Heberden's nodes and distal interphalangeal joint osteophytes and their role as markers of generalised disease. Ann Rheum Dis. 1998;57(4):246-8. doi:10.1136/ard.57.4.246. PMID: 9709182; PMCID: PMC1752580.
Tan AL, Grainger AJ, Tanner SF, et al. High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging for the assessment of hand osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(8):2355-65. doi:10.1002/art.21210. PMID: 16052535.
Alfadhli E. Cholesterol deposition around small joints of the hands in familial hypercholesterolemia mimicking "Bouchard's and Heberden's nodes" of osteoarthritis. Intern Med. 2010;49(15):1675-6. doi:10.2169/internalmedicine.49.2849
Seiler V. Meclofenamate sodium in the treatment of degenerative joint disease of the hand (Heberden nodes). Arzneimittelforschung. 1983;33(4A):656-9. PMID: 6349652.
Kroon FPB, Carmona L, Schoones JW, Kloppenburg M. Efficacy and safety of non-pharmacological, pharmacological and surgical treatment for hand osteoarthritis: a systematic literature review informing the 2018 update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of hand osteoarthritis. RMD Open. 2018;4(2):e000734. Published 2018 Oct 11. doi:10.1136/rmdopen-2018-000734
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Henoch Schoenlein Purpura]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/henoch-schoenlein-purpura]
Henoch-Schonlein purpura (anaphylactoid purpura)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
Henoch–Schönlein purpura — extra information
Anaphylactoid purpura, Henoch–Schönlein purpura, Allergic purpura, Immunoglobulin-A vasculitis, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, Henoch Schönlein purpura
Blood vessel problems
Blood vessel problems
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
Author: Dr Todd Gunson, Dermatology Registrar, Dept of Dermatology, Greenlane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, 2007.
What is Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a form of leukocytoclastic or small-vessel vasculitis, most often observed in children. It is sometimes called anaphylactoid purpura.
HSP results from inflammation of the small blood vessels in the skin and various other tissues within the body.
Who gets Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
15 to 40% of children have at least one recurrence.
What causes Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
Although the precise cause of HSP is unknown, clinical evidence points to an infectious aetiology. The peak incidence of paediatric HSP is during the autumn and winter months. It often preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection and is found to cluster within families. Beta-haemolytic streptococci are often found on throat swab or there is positive streptococcal serology on blood testing.
A multitude of other associations has been reported, including medications. These include ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, clarithromycin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories.
The underlying mechanism of small blood vessel inflammation is the deposition of IgA immunoglobulin within the blood vessel walls. This leads to leukocytoclastic vasculitis. A subtle defect of IgA may predispose people to develop HSP.
What are the clinical features of Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
Classical purpura Ankle swelling (arthritis) Close-up of purpuric rash with vesicle (blister) formation Henoch-Schönlein purpura Henoch-Schönlein purpura Henoch-Schönlein purpura
The classic presentation of HSP is with a tetrad of symptoms and signs:
The symptoms are usually preceded by 2–3 weeks of fever, headache, muscle/joint aches, or abdominal pain.
Abdominal pain is present in half to three-quarters of patients and precedes the rash in up to one third. Abdominal pain may be associated with diarrhoea and bleeding from the bowel. Orchitis and intussusception are possible complications.
Rarely other organs, such as the lungs, brain, and heart, are involved.
What tests should be performed in Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
The diagnosis of HSP is often obvious if the classic symptoms are present.
A blood and urine test should be performed to look for any signs of kidney involvement. These tests should be repeated at regular intervals initially to ensure kidney impairment is not developing or worsening.
Blood pressure should be measured at the same time.
A skin biopsy is often not necessary, especially in children, but may be performed to confirm the diagnosis.
What is the treatment for Henoch–Schönlein purpura?
Non-steroidal-anti-inflammatory-drugs (eg, ibuprofen) are effective at relieving joint and abdominal pain.
Other options include dapsone or colchicine.
If significant kidney involvement is present, steroids are usually combined with more potent immunosuppressive medications or intravenous immunoglobulin.
Dermatology. J Bolognia, JL Jorizzo, RP Rapini as eds. Mosby 2003.
Cutaneous small vessel vasculitis
Acute haemorrhagic oedema of infancy
Direct immunofluorescence
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
HSP (Henoch-Schonlein purpura) — Kidshealth.org.nz
Dermatologic Manifestations of Henoch-Schönlein Purpura — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Herpetic Whitlow]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/herpetic-whitlow]
Herpetic Whitlow — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Herpetic whitlow — extra information
Whitlow finger, Herpetic felon, Herpes simplex whitlow
Last reviewed: April 2023Author(s): Dr Vidette Wong, Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom (2023)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson Edited by the DermNet content department
Differential diagnoses
What is herpetic whitlow?
Herpetic whitlow is a painful viral cutaneous infection that usually affects the distal fingers or thumbs, and occasionally the toes. It is caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 or 2, and can be vesicular or pustular in nature.
Clustered vesicles, due to HSV, have broken down into erosions on the proximal nail fold Several nail folds are affected by herpetic whitlow in a woman receiving chemotherapy Clustered clear vesicles on the proximal nail fold typical of an early phase of a herpetic whitlow A herpetic whitlow on the thumb five days after onset Clustered clear vesicles and oedema in an early herpetic whitlow in skin of colour (HW-patient1)Early clustered vesicles in a herpetic whitlow
Who gets herpetic whitlow?
In young children, herpetic whitlow commonly occurs following oral herpes infection. This is thought to be related to thumb sucking causing autoinoculation from active herpetic lesions in the mouth.
Herpetic whitlow in adults is more commonly associated with exposure to genital herpes, or occupational exposure of dental and other health care workers to patients with herpes simplex including oral secretions.
People who are immunosuppressed are also more susceptible to herpetic infections.
What causes herpetic whitlow?
Autoinoculation through spread from other herpetic lesions such as oral or genital herpes.
Direct exogenous inoculation from an external source.
Viral reactivation following previous herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 or 2. HSV results in viral invasion and replication in epidermal and dermal cells, which can progress to involve the sensory dorsal root ganglion. Here, HSV remains and can be periodically reactivated to cause disease anywhere (including the fingertips).
Patients may report preceding trauma such as a torn cuticle.
What are the clinical features of herpetic whitlow?
Patients typically present with a painful swollen digit, often the thumb or index finger.
Possible prodromal fever and malaise.
Localised itch, burning, and altered sensation (may precede vesicle formation).
One or more (often clustered) 1–3 mm fluid-filled vesicles with surrounding erythema, most often affecting the distal phalanx.
Vesicular fluid is usually clear but can progress to become turbid, sero-purulent, or haemorrhagic.
Vesicles can coalesce into larger bullae and can spread proximally.
Proximal lymphangitis and lymphadenopathy may be observed.
Typically, the vesicles will crust and desquamate over several weeks and resolve without any treatment.
Other herpetic lesions (eg, oral or genital) may also be present.
The thumb or index finger are most commonly affected; it is unusual for more than one digit to be affected.
What are the complications of herpetic whitlow?
Superimposed bacterial or fungal infection and potential abscess development.
Secondary herpes simplex infection including spread to oral, ocular, or genital areas.
Recurrence (~23% in one paediatric review).
How is herpetic whitlow diagnosed?
Herpetic whitlow can be diagnosed clinically based on history and appearance of the lesions.
Viral cultures or a Tzanck smear can be used to confirm the diagnosis. Ballooning multinucleated giant cells and eosinophilic inclusion bodies are seen on the Tzanck smear. A bacterial swab can also be taken if secondary or concurrent bacterial infection is suspected.
What is the differential diagnosis for herpetic whitlow?
Other paronychia (eg, staphylococcal infection).
Digital pulp abscess (felon).
Early localised hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) can present similarly with vesicular or papulovesicular eruption.
What is the treatment for herpetic whitlow?
Education on skin protection — keep affected digit/s clean and covered with a dressing to prevent further irritation and spread, as viral shedding can occur until all lesions have cleared.
Topical antiseptics can be used.
Simple analgesia as required for pain.
Antivirals (eg, topical or oral aciclovir, or valaciclovir) commenced within 48 hours of symptom onset may reduce the duration of symptoms and risk of recurrence.
Consider suppressive or prophylactic antiviral therapy for those with recurrent flares or severe episodes, especially if they are immunosuppressed.
For superimposed bacterial infection, antibiotics may be indicated.
Surgical drainage is not recommended due to the risk of viraemia and secondary bacterial infection.
Consider testing for HIV if the lesion is extensive and if there are risk factors.
How can herpetic whitlow be prevented?
Children with oral herpes should be discouraged from sucking their thumb.
What is the outcome for herpetic whitlow?
Herpetic whitlow is self-limiting and usually resolves without any complications in 2–4 weeks. Recurrence is possible due to reactivation of the virus, which can be triggered by stress, other illness, or trauma to the skin or nails. Recurrent episodes are usually less severe than the primary infection.
Betz D, Fane K. Herpetic Whitlow. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022. Available here
Klotz RW. Herpetic whitlow: an occupational hazard. AANA J. 1990;58(1):8–13. Journal
Lieberman L, Castro D, Bhatt A, Guyer F. Case report: palmar herpetic whitlow and forearm lymphangitis in a 10-year-old female. BMC Pediatr. 2019;19(1):450. doi: 10.1186/s12887-019-1828-5. Journal
Szinnai G, Schaad UB, Heininger U. Multiple herpetic whitlow lesions in a 4-year-old girl: case report and review of the literature. Eur J Pediatr. 2001 Sep;160(9):528–33. doi: 10.1007/s004310100800. Journal
Viral infections and the skin
Blistering skin conditions
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hidradenitis Suppurativa]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hidradenitis-suppurativa]
Hidradenitis Suppurativa (Acne Inversa): A Complete Picture - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Hidradenitis suppurativa — extra information
Acne inversa, Hidradenitis axillaris, Apocrine acne, Verneuil disease, Suppurative hidradenitis, Apocrinitis
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
59393003, 402826001, 402827005, 402828000
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Last Reviewed: August, 2025
Authors: Dr Mehak Chadha, Dermatology Registrar; Dr Laura Savage, Consultant Dermatologist, Leeds Centre for Dermatology, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom (2025)
Peer reviewed by: Nancy Huang (MBChB), DermNet Medical Writer, New Zealand (2025)
Previous contributors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer; Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (1997); Dr Abdulhadi Jfri, Dermatology Resident; Dr Elizabeth O’Brien, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada (2015)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department.
Differential diagnoses
What is hidradenitis suppurativa?
Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder that affects apocrine gland-bearing skin, typically the axillae, groin, perianal region, buttocks, and inframammary folds. It is characterised by persistent, deep-seated, painful nodules and abscesses that can progress to sinus tract formation, purulent discharge, and scarring.
Also known as acne inversa, this disorder can significantly impact quality of life and is associated with several disease-modifying comorbidities, including metabolic syndrome and psychiatric disorders.
Mild axillary HS showing scars and post-inflammatory erythema Marked comedones in axillary HS Nodules and sinus formation in axillary HS HS in the groins spreading down to the upper thighs An acute painful inflammatory nodule in axillary HS Severe axillary HS with scars and sinus formation Submammary HS Inflammatory HS in the groin with multiple painful nodules
Who gets hidradenitis suppurativa?
The global prevalence of hidradenitis suppurativa is estimated to range from 0.1% to 4%. However, underdiagnosis and misdiagnosis likely mean that the actual prevalence is higher. Delayed diagnosis is also common.
HS typically presents following puberty by the second to third decades of life. Studies show that there is no racial predilection, although some surveys suggest it may be more common in African Americans.
Risk factors for the development of HS:
Sex — Female-to-male ratio of approximately 3:1 in Western countries, though perianal disease tends to be more common in men.
Family history — One-third of patients report an affected first-degree relative.
Obesity — Likely related to increased skin fold friction and chronic systemic inflammation; childhood obesity is correlated with a higher risk of early-onset HS.
Cigarette smoking — Possibly related to delayed wound healing and follicular occlusion due to nicotine and other components.
Associated comorbidities:
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Cardiovascular disease
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation
Other immune-mediated diseases eg, inflammatory bowel disease, spondyloarthropathy, rheumatoid arthritis, non-infectious uveitis (possible association)
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (slightly increased incidence).
What causes hidradenitis suppurativa?
The exact cause of hidradenitis suppurativa is not fully understood. HS is described as an autoinflammatory syndrome, and its development is influenced by genetic, immune, hormonal, microbial, mechanical, and lifestyle factors. Hidradenitis suppurativa is not contagious, and it is not caused by poor hygiene.
The early pathogenesis of HS is thought to involve follicular occlusion and rupture, an abnormal innate immune response, and a subsequent inflammatory cascade.
Leukocytic infiltration, oedema, and bacterial dysbiosis within ruptured follicular units lead to inflammatory nodules and abscesses.
Persistent inflammation results in extensive fibrosis, and late signs of HS consist of epithelial-lined, pus-draining tunnels deep in the dermis.
What are the clinical features of hidradenitis suppurativa?
Hidradenitis suppurativa is characterised by:
Open and closed comedones
Painful firm papules and nodules
Pustules and fluctuant pseudocysts
Hypertrophic or atrophic scarring with deformity
Hidradenitis suppurativa typically affects intertriginous areas and can affect one or multiple sites:
This subtype tends to have an earlier age of onset and is characterised by nodules and comedones.
There is a greater incidence of concomitant papular and nodular acne.
The disease trajectory is less aggressive, with abscesses seen infrequently.
This subtype is particularly aggressive and has a greater incidence of abscesses and fistulas, which can coalesce into scarring plaques.
Odour and pain are experienced more frequently.
Folliculitis and/or comedones are common, interspersed with abscesses.
Individuals are predisposed to develop epidermal cysts, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation may occur.
Tunnels are not rare, but are often thin and non-branching.
Progression is usually mild.
Hidradenitis suppurativa can also occur within rare autoinflammatory syndromes:
Follicular occlusion syndrome: acne conglobata, dissecting cellulitis, pilonidal cyst
PASH syndrome: pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative hidradenitis
PAPASH syndrome: pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative hidradenitis
PsAPASH syndrome: psoriatic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, and hidradenitis suppurativa
PASS syndrome: pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, hidradenitis suppurativa, ankylosing spondylitis
SAPHO syndrome: synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis.
How is the severity of hidradenitis suppurativa assessed?
There are several severity scales to assess hidradenitis suppurativa clinically and academically.
This is the most commonly recognised clinical scoring system:
Stage I — Single or multiple abscesses without sinus tracts and scarring
Stage II — Recurrent abscesses with sinus tracts and scarring
Stage III — Diffuse or multiple interconnected sinus tracts and abscesses across the entire area
The Hurley staging system is not a dynamic means of assessment. Once a stage is reached, it cannot be downgraded due to the irreversibility of scarring with medical therapy.
International Hidradenitis Suppurativa Severity Score (IHS4)
IHS4 is a dynamic scoring tool that can be particularly helpful in monitoring disease progression and response to treatment.
Number of draining sinus tracts (fistulae/sinuses)
The final score is calculated by the weighted sum of number of nodules, abscesses, and draining sinus tracts.
Mild: <3 pointsModerate: 4-10 pointsSevere: >11 points
Revuz-Modified Sartorius Score
This score is made by counting involved regions, nodules, and sinus tracts. Its use has declined due to its complexity and the introduction of other measures such as the IHS4.
Anatomical regions involved: axilla, pectoral, inguinal/genital, intergluteal, buttocks
3 points for each region
4 points for each abscess or draining fistula 2 points for each nodule 1 point for each scar 0.5 points for other changes (folliculitis, pustules)
Distance between lesions OR size of single lesion
8 points if >10 cm 4 points if 5-10 cm 2 points for <5 cm 0 points for ‘inactive’ disease
Are all lesions clearly separated by normal skin?
6 points for no 0 points for yes
The Hidradenitis Suppurativa Quality of Life (HiSQOL) score
The HiSQOL is used to consider the degree of pain, the number of flares, and the impact on daily life in hidradenitis suppurativa. This is a reliable and valid tool to measure HS-specific health-related quality of life.
The Hidradenitis Suppurativa Clinical Response (HiSCR)
HiSCR is defined as a reduction in inflammatory lesion count (ie, abscesses, inflammatory nodules) and no increase in abscesses or draining fistulas, when compared with baseline.
It is predominantly used in clinical trials as a dichotomous outcome to assess the effectiveness of treatment with biologics. It has limited use in clinical practice.
The most commonly used scores are: HiSCR50, HiSCR75, and HiSCR90, representing a 50%, 75%, and 90% reduction in inflammatory lesion counts as compared to baseline, respectively.
What are the complications of hidradenitis suppurativa?
Psychosocial morbidity and reduced quality of life
Chronic pain and impaired mobility
Lymphatic obstruction and lymphoedema
Squamous cell carcinoma
Anaemia of chronic disease
Systemic amyloidosis
How is hidradenitis suppurativa diagnosed?
Hidradenitis suppurativa is primarily diagnosed clinically, based on the modified Dessau criteria.Diagnosis requires fulfilment of all three components:
Typical lesions (nodules, abscesses, sinus tracts, and/or fibrotic scars)
Typical distribution (intertriginous areas)
Recurrence and chronicity of lesions (≥2 episodes over 6 months)
Diagnosis is supported by:
Positive family history of hidradenitis suppurativa
Negative microbiology swab of affected skin.
Biopsy is not typically needed, but it can help exclude other conditions eg, if there are features suggestive of squamous cell carcinoma. Histological features of HS include:
Follicular occlusion
Follicular hyperkeratosis
Follicular epithelial hyperplasia
Epidermal psoriasiform hyperplasia
Perifollicular inflammation.
Imaging is not necessary for diagnosis. However, ultrasound can help identify subclinical features, and MRI is useful for assessing complications and the extent of anogenital disease.
What is the differential diagnosis for hidradenitis suppurativa?
Staphylococcal skin infections, including abscesses, carbuncles, and furuncles
Cysts eg, Bartholin cyst, epidermoid cyst
Cutaneous Crohn disease
Anogenital Crohn disease
What is the treatment for hidradenitis suppurativa?
Optimal management of hidradenitis suppurativa requires a multidisciplinary team approach consisting of dermatology, general and/or plastic surgery, general practice, wound care management, dietetics, weight management services, and psychology.
Treatment should be tailored to each individual and follow local or regional management guidelines, where available.
Patient education with reassurance that the condition is not infectious nor a result of poor hygiene
Assess quality of life impact with HiSQOL, along with lesion count and frequency of flares
Record the Hurley Stage and consider immediate referral to secondary care dermatology for stage II-III disease
Screen for and manage comorbidities eg, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, depression/anxiety, PCOS, diabetes mellitus, etc
Weight management — consider a GLP-1 agonist if obese, especially in the presence of associated comorbidities
Wound care — absorbent dressings with atraumatic adhesives are recommended
Pain management eg, oral paracetamol and NSAIDs (first-line), opioids (cautious use), anticonvulsants or antidepressants (for neuropathic pain)
Pruritus management eg, topical corticosteroids, oral first-generation antihistamines
Outlined below are commonly utilised treatments for hidradenitis suppurativa.
May be used alone for mild HS or as adjunctive therapies in more severe disease:
Topical clindamycin 1% lotion/gel/cream
Applied twice daily to affected regions
Topical antiseptics eg, 4% chlorhexidine gluconate solution
Limited evidence base but frequently used according to patient preference
Magnesium sulphate paste
Draws pus from boils and carbuncles for acute relief
Intralesional treatments
Triamcinolone acetonide 10–40 mg/mL injections to individual inflammatory lesions; may require repeat sessions on a weekly to three-monthly basis.
Systemic treatments — Antibiotics
Short-course antibiotics are used for superimposed bacterial infections.
Longer courses of antibiotics are used in HS for their presumed immunomodulatory properties.
Always follow local antibiotic guidelines.
Oral tetracyclines (single-agent)
Doxycycline 100 mg, OD or BD
Minocycline 100 mg, BD
Lymecycline 408 mg, OD or BD
Tetracycline 500 mg, BD Treatment response is assessed after 12 weeks.
Used for mild to moderate disease (Hurley Stage I/II)
Clindamycin plus rifampicin
Oral clindamycin 300 mg BD and rifampicin 300 mg BD for up to 12 weeks. Adjustments if the regimen is intolerable:
Clindamycin 150 mg OD and rifampicin 150 mg OD
Single-agent clindamycin 150 mg, OD or BD.
Used for severe disease (Hurley Stage III) Also used if the tetracycline is not effective after 12 weeks or is not tolerated.
Intravenous antibiotics
IV ertapenem 1 g OD for 6 weeks. Alternatively: IV piperacillin/tazobactam 13.5 g total daily, for 6 weeks.
Used as rescue therapy for severe flares unresponsive to clindamycin plus rifampicin. Also used as a bridging in severe disease prior to surgery.
Systemic treatments — Biologics
Biologics should be initiated in the case of inadequate disease control from the above treatments. Three biologics have been licensed for the treatment of HS: adalimumab, secukinumab, and bimekizumab.
Adalimumab (anti-TNF)
Loading dose: 160 mg, then 80 mg after 2 weeks
Maintenance dose: 40 mg every week OR 80 mg every 2 weeks
Review treatment response after 12 weeks of use
PIONEER I and II phase 3 clinical trials showed 41-60% of the treatment group achieved HiSCR50 compared to 26-27% of the placebo group.
Adalimumab is particularly useful when used early in the disease course.
Can be combined with oral tetracycline antibiotics for an additive benefit.
Do not use in patients with demyelinating disease (eg, multiple sclerosis) or heart failure.
Secukinumab (IL-17A inhibitor)
Loading dose: 300 mg every week for 5 doses
Maintenance dose: 300 mg every 4 weeks, increase if necessary to 300 mg every 2 weeks
Review treatment response after 16 weeks of use
SUNSHINE and SUNRISE phase 3 clinical trials showed 42-46% of the treatment group achieved HiSCR50 compared to 31% of the placebo group.
Low rates of oral candidiasis were observed (1-3%).
Not recommended in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Bimekizumab (IL17A/F inhibitor)
Loading dose: 320 mg every 2 weeks (weeks 0-16)
Maintenance dose: 320 mg every 4 weeks (from week 20 onwards)
Review treatment response after 16 weeks of use
BE HEARD I and BE HEARD II phase 3 clinical trials showed that 48-52% of patients achieved HiSCR50 with two weekly dosing, compared to 29-32% with placebo at week 16.
Adverse events over two years of treatment included oral candidiasis (12.0%), hepatic events (ALT or AST elevations >3 x ULN in 10.7%), and injection site reactions (5.9%).
There is also limited data to support the use of infliximab, ustekinumab, and brodalumab in moderate to severe HS.
Other systemic agents
Systemic corticosteroids
May be helpful as short-term rescue medication for acute flares
High dose used eg, 0.5–0.7 mg/kg/day oral prednisolone equivalent
Rapid tapering is required
Use only in males or non-fertile females if scarring folliculitis is present
Up to 200mg/day for a minimum of 3 months may be considered
Metformin modified release
Start from 500 mg once daily and, if tolerated, titrate up to 2-3 g daily over weeks (may help metabolic complications but may not improve skin symptoms)
Anti-androgen therapy
Spironolactone (25-100 mg/day)
Only for use in non-pregnant women, especially those with features of hyperandrogenism or PCOS
90 mg/day in mild-moderate HS
Future treatment options
Therapeutics in phase II/III development include:
Amlitelimab (OX40 inhibitor)
Eltrekibart (CXCR 1/2 inhibitor)
Lutikizumab (IL-1α/β inhibitor)
Povorcitinib (JAK1 inhibitor)
Remibrutinib (BTKi inhibitor)
Sonelokimab (IL-17A/F nanobody)
Spesolimab (IL-36 inhibitor)
Upadacitinib (JAK1 inhibitor)
Ruxolitinib cream (JAK1/2 inhibitor)
GLP-1 agonists - weight reduction can reduce disease severity.
Surgery is an effective treatment that should be used in combination with lifestyle and medical intervention. Small nodules are ideally addressed early to prevent rupture of blocked follicles and the subsequent development of chronic, interconnecting sinus tracts.
It is usually safe to continue biological treatments whilst undergoing surgery, but specialist surgical opinion should be sought on an individual basis.
Procedural options are listed below:
Incision and drainage
Lesion type: acute abscesses
For immediate relief, but has an almost 100% chance of recurrence
Wound closure with secondary intention healing
Deroofing (unroofing)
Lesion type: persistent nodules, abscesses, and sinus tracts
Wound closure with secondary intention healing
Lesion type: persistent nodules, abscesses, and sinus tracts
Wound closure with primary closure or secondary intention healing
Radical excisional surgery
Removes the entire affected area
Wound closure with skin flap repair, secondary intention healing, or negative pressure wound therapy
Risks of surgery include wound breakdown, numbness, several months of post-operative healing, and lesion recurrence.
Non-standard physical therapies
Hair removal may be considered in non-inflammatory HS using laser therapy (eg, Ng:Yag, alexandrite, or diode lasers) or intense pulsed light therapy.
This may improve pain and slow disease progression by destroying the folliculo-sebaceous unit, thereby reducing follicular blockage and decreasing bacterial presence.
What is the outcome for hidradenitis suppurativa?
Hidradenitis suppurativa is a genetically driven, chronic scarring condition that can significantly impair quality of life if left untreated. Spontaneous remission or reduced inflammation may occur over time (eg, after menopause in women), although scarring persists. Early diagnosis and treatment are essential to minimise lasting damage.
Alikhan A, et al. North American clinical management guidelines for hidradenitis suppurativa: A publication from the United States and Canadian Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundations: Part I: Diagnosis, evaluation, and the use of complementary and procedural management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019 Jul;81(1):76-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.02.067. Journal
Cartron A, Driscoll MS. Comorbidities of hidradenitis suppurativa: A review of the literature. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2019 Jul 2;5(5):330-334. doi:10.1016/j.ijwd.2019.06.026. Journal
Ingram JR, et al. Unmet clinical needs and burden of disease in hidradenitis suppurativa: real-world experience from EU5 and US. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Sep;36(9):1597-1605. doi: 10.1111/jdv.18163. Journal
Jfri A, Nassim D, O'Brien E, Gulliver W, Nikolakis G, Zouboulis CC. Prevalence of Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Systematic Review and Meta-regression Analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2021 Aug 1;157(8):924-931. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2021.1677. Journal
J.R. Ingram, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of hidradenitis suppurativa (acne inversa) 2018, British Journal of Dermatology, Volume 180, Issue 5, 1 May 2019, Pages 1009–1017. doi:10.1111/bjd.17537. Journal
Krueger JG, et al. Hidradenitis suppurativa: new insights into disease mechanisms and an evolving treatment landscape. Br J Dermatol. 2024 Jan 23;190(2):149-162. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljad345. Journal
Martorell A, et al. Defining hidradenitis suppurativa phenotypes based on the elementary lesion pattern: results of a prospective study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2020 Jun;34(6):1309-1318. doi:10.1111/jdv.16183. Journal
Nguyen T, Damiani G, Orenstein LA, et al. Hidradenitis suppurativa: an update on epidemiology, phenotypes, diagnosis, pathogenesis, comorbidities and quality of life. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology. 2021;35(1):50-61. doi:10.1111/jdv.16677. Journal
Smith SDB, Okoye GA, Sokumbi O. Histopathology of Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Systematic Review. Dermatopathology (Basel). 2022 Jul 14;9(3):251-257. doi:10.3390/dermatopathology9030029. Journal
Zouboulis CC, et al. European S2k guidelines for hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa part 2: Treatment. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2025 May;39(5):899-941. doi: 10.1111/jdv.20472. Journal
Autoinflammatory syndromes | Follicular occlusion syndrome | PAPA syndrome |  SAPHO syndrome
Diabetes mellitus | Metabolic syndrome | Obesity and the skin | Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Smoking and its effects on the skin
Hidradenitis Suppurativa — Medline Plus
The Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Hyperhidrosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/hyperhidrosis]
Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Hyperhidrosis — extra information
Excessive sweating, Primary hyperhidrosis, Secondary hyperhidrosis, Generalised hyperhidrosis, Localised hyperhidrosis
R61, L74.5, L74.519, L74.52,
EE00.Z, EE00.0Z, EE00.0Y, EE00.00, EE00.01, EE00.02, EE00.1
312230002, 303089000, 30309009, 274674005, 274673004, 403375001, 427794001, 42661000119104, 230668002, 723000001, 91480001, 394925004
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated July 2015.
What is hyperhidrosis?
Hyperhidrosis is the name given to excessive and uncontrollable sweating.
Who gets hyperhidrosis?
Primary hyperhidrosis is reported to affect 1–3% of the US population and nearly always starts during childhood or adolescence. The tendency may be inherited, and it is reported to be particularly prevalent in Japanese people.
Secondary hyperhidrosis is less common and can present at any age.
What causes hyperhidrosis?
Primary hyperhidrosis appears to be due to overactivity of the hypothalamic thermoregulatory centre in the brain and is transmitted via the sympathetic nervous system to the eccrine sweat gland.
Triggers to attacks of sweating may include:
Causes of secondary localised hyperhidrosis include:
The auriculotemporal syndrome (gustatory hyperhidrosis)
Peripheral nerve damage, when it may be associated with cutaneous dysaesthesia
Surgical sympathectomy
Chronic anxiety disorder
Causes of secondary generalised hyperhidrosis include:
Cardiovascular disorders
Other endocrine tumours, such as phaeochromocytoma
Drugs: alcohol, caffeine, corticosteroids, cholinesterase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, nicotinamide and opioids
What are the clinical features of hyperhidrosis?
Hyperhidrosis can be localised or generalised.
Localised hyperhidrosis affects armpits, palms, soles, face or other sites
Generalised hyperhidrosis affects most or all of the body
It can be primary or secondary.
Primary hyperhidrosis
Starts in childhood or adolescence
May persist lifelong or improve with age
There may be a family history
Tends to involve armpits, palms and or soles symmetrically
Usually, sweating reduces at night and disappears during sleep
Secondary hyperhidrosis
Less common than primary hyperhidrosis
More likely to be unilateral and asymmetrical, or generalised
Can occur at night or during sleep.
Due to endocrine or neurological conditions or drugs
What is the impact of excessive sweating?
Hyperhidrosis is embarrassing and interferes with many daily activities.
Axillary hyperhidrosis
Clothing becomes damp, stained and must be changed several times a day
Wet skin folds are prone to chafing, irritant dermatitis and infection
Excessive sweating in armpits
Palmar hyperhidrosis
Slippery hands lead to avoidance of handshaking
Marks left on paper and fabrics
Difficulty in writing neatly
Malfunction of electronic equipment such as keypads and trackpads
Prone to a blistering type of hand dermatitis (pompholyx)
Plantar hyperhidrosis
Affects soles of the feet
Prone to a blistering type of dermatitis (pompholyx)
Prone to secondary infection (tinea pedis, pitted keratolysis)
How is hyperhidrosis diagnosed?
Hyperhidrosis is usually diagnosed clinically. Tests relate to the potential underlying cause of hyperhidrosis and are rarely necessary for primary hyperhidrosis.
The precise site of localised hyperhidrosis can be revealed using the Minor test.
Iodine (orange) is painted onto the skin and air-dried.
Starch (white) is dusted on the iodine.
Sweating is revealed by a change to dark blue/black colour.
Screening tests in secondary generalised hyperhidrosis depend on other clinical features but should include as a minimum:
Blood sugar / glycosylated haemoglobin
What is the treatment of hyperhidrosis?
Wear loose-fitting, stain-resistant, sweat-proof garments.
Change clothing and footwear when damp.
Socks containing silver or copper reduce infection and odour.
Use absorbent insoles in shoes and replace them frequently.
Use a non-soap cleanser.
Apply corn starch powder after bathing.
Avoid caffeinated food and drink.
Discontinue any drug that may be causing hyperhidrosis.
Apply antiperspirant.
Topical antiperspirants
Deodorants are fragrances or antiseptics to disguise unpleasant smells; on their own, they do not reduce perspiration.
Antiperspirants contain 10–25% aluminium salts to reduce sweating; "clinical strength" aluminium zirconium salts are more effective than aluminium chloride.
Topical anticholinergics such as glycopyrrolate and oxybutynin gel have been successful in reducing sweating; cloths containing glycopyrronium tosylate (Qbrexza™) were approved by the FDA in July 2018 for axillary hyperhidrosis in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Dusting powder is available containing the anticholinergic drug, diphemanil 2%. Sofpironium gel was approved by the FDA in 2024 for axillary hyperhidrosis.
Antiperspirants are available as a cream, aerosol spray, stick, roll-on, wipe, powder, and paint.
Specific products are available for different body sites such as underarms, other skin folds, face, hands and feet.
They are best applied when the skin is dry, after a cool shower just before sleep.
Wash off in the morning if tending to irritate.
Use from once weekly to daily if necessary.
If irritating, apply hydrocortisone cream short-term.
Iontophoresis is used for hyperhidrosis of palms, soles and armpits.
Mains and battery-powered units are available.
The affected area is immersed in water, or, with a more significant effect, glycopyrronium solution.
A gentle electrical current is passed across the skin surface for 10–20 minutes.
Repeated daily for several weeks then less frequently as required
The treatment requires a long-term commitment.
It is not always effective.
Oral anticholinergic drugs
Available drugs are propantheline 15–30 mg up to three times daily, oxybutynin 2.5–7.5 mg daily, benztropine, glycopyrrolate (unapproved).
They can cause dry mouth, and less often, blurred vision, constipation, dizziness, palpitations and other side effects.
People with glaucoma or urinary retention should not take them.
Caution in older patients: increased risk of side effects is reported, including dementia.
Oral anticholinergics may interact with other medications.
Beta-blockers block the physical effects of anxiety.
They may aggravate asthma or symptoms of peripheral vascular disease.
Calcium channel blockers, alpha-adrenergic agonists (clonidine), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and anxiolytics may also be useful for some patients.
Botulinum toxin injections
Botulinum toxin injections are approved for hyperhidrosis affecting the armpits.
The injections reduce or stop sweating for three to six months.
Botulinum toxins are used off-license for localised hyperhidrosis in other sites such as palms.
Topical botulinum toxin gel is under investigation for hyperhidrosis.
Surgical removal of axillary sweat glands
Overactive sweat glands in the armpits may be removed by several methods, usually under local anaesthetic.
Tumescent liposuction (sucking them out)
Subcutaneous curettage (scraping them out)
Microwave thermolysis (the MiraDry® system approved by FDA in 2011)
Subdermal Nd:YAG laser
High-intensity micro-focused ultrasound (experimental)
Surgery to cut out the sweat gland-bearing skin of the armpits. If a large area needs to be removed, it may be repaired using a skin graft
Division of the sympathetic spinal nerves by chemical or surgical endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy (ETS) may reduce sweating of face (T2 ganglion) or armpit and hand (T3 or T4 ganglion) but is reserved for the most severely affected individuals due to potential risks and complications.
Sympathectomy is often accompanied by undesirable skin warmth and dryness.
New-onset hyperhidrosis of other sites occurs in 50–90% of patients and is severe in 2%. It is reported to be less frequent after T4 ganglion sympathectomy compared with T2 ganglion sympathectomy.
Serious complications include Horner syndrome, pneumothorax (in up to 10%), pneumonia and persistent pain (in fewer than 2%).
Lumbar sympathectomy is not recommended for hyperhidrosis affecting the feet, as it can interfere with sexual function.
What is the outlook for hyperhidrosis?
Localised primary hyperhidrosis tends to improve with age. The outlook for secondary localised or generalised hyperhidrosis depends on the cause.
Future treatments for hyperhidrosis
Several research projects are underway to find safer and more effective treatments for hyperhidrosis. These include:
Combination of oxybutynin and pilocarpine (to counteract the adverse effects of the anticholinergic, oxybutynin) THVD-102
Lee KY, Levell NJ. Turning the tide: a history and review of hyperhidrosis treatment. JRSM Open 2014; 5: 2042533313505511. doi: 10.1177/2042533313505511. PubMed Central
Schollhammer M, Brenaut E, Menard-Andivot N, Pillette-Delarue M, Zagnoli A, Chassain-Le Lay M, Sassolas B, Jouan N, Le Ru Y, Abasq-Thomas C, Greco M, Penven K, Roguedas-Contios AM, Dupré-Goetghebeur D, Gouedard C, Misery L, Le Gal G. Oxybutynin as a treatment for generalized hyperhidrosis: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Br J Dermatol 2015; 173: 1163–8. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13973. PubMed
Nguyen NV, Gralla J, Abbott J, Bruckner AL. Oxybutynin 3% gel for the treatment of primary focal hyperhidrosis in adolescents and young adults. Pediatr Dermatol 2018; 35: 208–12.  Journal
Schollhammer M, Brenaut E , Menard‐Andivot N et al. Oxybutynin as a treatment for generalized hyperhidrosis: a randomized, placebo‐controlled trial. Br J Dermatol 1015; 173: 1163–8. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13973. Journal
Wolosker N, Teivelis MP, Krutman M, et al. Long‐term efficacy of oxybutynin for palmar and plantar hyperhidrosis in children younger than 14 years. Pediatr Dermatol 2015; 32: 663–7. doi: 10.1111/pde.12385. Journal
Nawrocki S, Cha J, The Etiology, Diagnosis and Management of Hyperhidrosis: A Comprehensive Review. Part II. Therapeutic Options, J Am Acad Dermat 2019; 81: 669–80. doi: Journal
Astman N, Friedberg I, Wikstrom J et al. The Association between Obesity and Hyperhidrosis: A Nationwide, Cross Sectional Study of 2.77 Million Israeli Adolescents. J Am Acad Derm 2019; 81: 624–7. doi: Journal
Hsu TH, Chen YT, Tu YK, Li CN. A systematic review of microwave-based therapy for axillary hyperhidrosis. J Cosmet Laser Ther 2017; 19: 275–82. doi: 10.1080/14764172.2017.1303168. PubMed
Gregoriou S, Sidiropoulou P, Kontochristopoulos G, Rigopoulos D. Management Strategies Of Palmar Hyperhidrosis: Challenges And Solutions. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol 2019; 12: 733–44. doi: 10.2147/CCID.S210973. PubMed Central
Bromhidrosis (body odour)
Eccrine chromhidrosis
Apocrine chromhidrosis
Drug-induced hyperhidrosis
Auriculotemporal syndrome
Apocrine chromhidrosis
Social Citizen — Feel confident in shirts that stop underarm sweat stains
Hyperhidrosis — Medscape Reference
Surgical Treatment of Axillary Hyperhidrosis — Medscape
Sweat — Medline Plus
Excessive Sweating – Hyperhidrosis — Skin Care Guide
Hyperhidrosis — British Association of Dermatologists
Hyperhidrosis UK — Support Group
International Hyperhidrosis Society
Hyperhidrosis: Current Understanding, Current Therapy (requires login) — Medscape
Hyperhidrosis information — a patient's experiences
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe New Zealand
Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy for primary hyperhidrosis of the upper limb — NICE interventional procedure guidance, May 2014
Hyperhidrosis — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Idiopathic Guttate Hypomelanosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/idiopathic-guttate-hypomelanosis]
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis — extra information
Guttate hypomelanosis, Disseminate lenticular leukoderma
Pigmentary disorders
Pigmentary disorders
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2004; Updated: Willian Hao Syuen Ng, Medical Student, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia; Dr Paul Chee, Dermatologist and Director of Dermatology, John Hunter Hospital and Royal Newcastle Centre, Newcastle, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. June 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is a benign, common, acquired form of leukoderma that presents as small flat pale or white spots on sun-exposed limbs.
Who gets idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis can affect both sexes, all races, and all skin phototypes. Women and patients with skin of colour are most likely to present for medical attention.
What causes idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Although not fully understood, the aetiopathogenesis of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is probably multifactorial:
Chronic sun exposure
Other — trauma, autoimmune factors.
Abnormal keratinocyte phagocytosis has been demonstrated resulting in reduced transfer of melanin from melanocytes.
What are the clinical features of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis typically presents as smooth pale (hypopigmented) or white (depigmented) macules 2–5mm (range up to 1.5cm) in diameter most commonly on the sun-exposed aspects of the forearms, shins, and V of chest. Lesions are usually multiple and asymptomatic.
Porcelain-white patch extending peripherally
Three morphological variants have been described:
Solitary or multiple hypopigmented macules on a background of sun-damaged skin
Solitary white stellate sclerotic macule
Small hypopigmented macules with a scalloped margin and hyperkeratotic surface.
Wood lamp examination emphasises the loss of pigment.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is more obvious in skin of colour.
Dermoscopy of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
Well-defined white structureless area with ‘glow’
Absent pigment network
Various patterns and shapes described
Macroscopic view Nonpolarised dermoscopy view Polarised dermoscopy view
What are the complications of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is a benign condition of cosmetic significance. It can impact quality of life particularly in skin of colour.
How is idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis diagnosed?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is usually a clinical diagnosis.
Skin biopsy may be performed to rule out other conditions and histology is specific:
Flat thin epidermis with basket-weave hyperkeratosis and loss of rete
Absent or decreased melanin in epidermis
Normal or reduced melanocyte number and activity; large melanocytes with retained melanin and small retracted dendritic processes
Small foci of retained melanin in the basal layer; ‘skip lesions’.
What is the differential diagnosis for idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Lichen sclerosus and guttate morphoea
Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation such as following cryotherapy
What is the treatment for idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis usually does not require treatment apart from reassurance as to the benign nature of the condition.
Sun protection is recommended.
Cryotherapy — 5 second, single session, repigmentation visible by 4 months
Topical treatments — topical steroid, tacrolimus, topical retinoids
Procedural treatments — chemical peel, excimer laser, skin grafting.
What is the outcome for idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis?
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis does not require treatment due to its benign nature.It does not spontaneously repigment. With age, lesions may slowly enlarge and increase in number.
Bulat V, Šitum M, Maričić G, et al. Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis: a comprehensive overview. Pigmentary Disorders. 2014;1:150. doi: 10.4172/2376-0427.1000150. Journal
Juntongjin P, Laosakul K. Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis: a review of its etiology, pathogenesis, findings, and treatments. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2016;17(4):403-11. doi:10.1007/s40257-016-0195-3. PubMed
Ploysangam T, Dee-Ananlap S, Suvanprakorn P. Treatment of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis with liquid nitrogen: light and electron microscopic studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1990;23(4 Pt 1):681-4. doi:10.1016/0190-9622(90)70273-k. PubMed
Podder I, Sarkar R. Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis: an overview. Pigment Int. 2018;5:83–90. doi: 10.4103/Pigmentinternational.Pigmentinternational_. Journal
Saleem MD, Oussedik E, Picardo M, Schoch JJ. Acquired disorders with hypopigmentation: a clinical approach to diagnosis and treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(5):1233–50.e10. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.07.070. PubMed
Drug-induced vitiligo
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis dermoscopy
Pigmentation disorders
Skin pigmentation problems
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Immunoglobulin E Tests]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/immunoglobulin-e-tests]
Immunoglobulin E tests
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Immunoglobulin E tests
Immunoglobulin E tests — extra information
IgE tests, IgE testing
Diagnosis and testing
12263007, 76978006, 397587005, 397698003, 404273000, 399844005
Diagnosis and testing
Immunoglobulin E tests
Author: Dr Tim Aung, Primary Care Practitioner, Brisbane & Logan, Queensland, Australia. Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. February 2019.
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
Type I Hypersensitivity reaction
Indications for IgE testing
IgE level result interpretation
IgE testing vs. skin prick testing
What is immunoglobulin E?
Immunoglobulin E (IgE) is an antibody produced during a type I hypersensitivity reaction to an allergen. (See DermNet's page Allergies explained.) A schematic for the type I reaction pathway is shown below [1].
IgE antibodies are normally found in small amounts in the blood. A higher level than normal infers an allergic disorder may be present [2].
What is a type I hypersensitivity reaction?
Following exposure and re-exposure to an antigen (allergen) in susceptible individuals, a type I, or immediate, allergic reaction involves antigen-presenting cells, the activation of T-helper (Th) cells, the stimulation of B cells that release specific IgE, and the release of various pharmacological mediators (such as histamine, cytokines, leukotrienes, and others) from mast cells and basophils. The release of the mediators causes symptoms such as sneezing, wheezing, and weals.
Type 1 hypersensitivity reaction
APC, antigen-presenting cell; IgE, immunoglobulin E; Th, T-helper [cell].
Credit: Gaurab Karki, Microbiologist Kathmandu, via Online Biology Notes.
What is an IgE test?
An IgE test is a blood test that detects circulating IgE. The test includes two types of test:
Testing for total IgE — the total level of IgE in the blood.
Testing for specific IgE — the level of specific IgE against a particular allergen.
Total IgE and specific IgE tests can be ordered at the same time or independently.
IgE levels can be measured using one of several methods. The use of the radioallergosorbent test (RAST) to measure IgE has been superseded by the use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), fluorescent enzyme immunoassays (FEIA), and chemiluminescent immunoassays (CLIA) [3,4].
Vacutainers Removing blood for IgE tests
The colour of the top of the tube denotes what tests it is suitable for. In this case, the tube with the gold top (a serum separator tube) is used for IgE tests.
What are the indications for IgE testing?
An IgE test is indicated when the taking of a careful patient history and an examination lead to a suspicion of type I allergy.
An IgE test can also be used for monitoring a patient with a known allergic condition, such as:
Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
Allergic conjunctivitis
Chronic rhinosinusitis.
IgE tests are also useful to determine whether a patient is allergic to a specific protein, such as:
Types of food allergy (eg, peanuts)
Grass, weed or tree pollens
Animal dander or fur
Certain drugs and cosmetics
The venom of a bee or wasp.
An IgE test can be used when skin prick testing is not available or is unsuitable; for example, in an individual with dermographism, extensive skin disease, recent use of antihistamines or systemic steroids, or when there is concern that prick testing could cause an anaphylactic reaction.
Choosing Wisely recommendations
Although there is no absolute contraindication for IgE tests, the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, and Choosing Wisely make the following recommendations [5,6].
Don’t perform an indiscriminate battery of IgE tests in the evaluation of allergy.
Food-specific IgE testing should not be performed without a clinical patient history that is suggestive of IgE-mediated food allergy.
Specific IgE testing for inhalants or foods is not indicated in urticaria unless there is a clear history implicating an allergen as a provoking or perpetuating factor for the urticaria.
Indiscriminate batteries of IgE tests for foods are expensive and not useful, potentially leading to erroneous diagnoses and inappropriately restrictive diets.
Which specific allergens can be tested?
The specific allergens that can be tested can be classified as follows [7]:
Aeroallergens (inhalants)
Indoor allergens — including house dust mites, animal dander (eg, cat, dog, and cockroach), mould, and fungal spores
Outdoor allergens — such as pollens (from grasses, rye, weeds, and trees) and polluted air (smoke)
Food allergens — including milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, wheat, soy, codfish, and shellfish
Venoms — including bee, wasp, hornet, ant venoms
Dust mites (Dermatophagoides)
Medicines — such as penicillin, aspirin, and others
Metals (especially nickel, cobalt, chromium, and zinc)
IgE tests are also available to test different mixes of allergens. These include a:
Food mix (ie, egg white, milk, codfish, wheat, peanut, and soybean)
Cereal mix (ie, wheat, oat, corn, sesame seed, and buckwheat)
Fruit mix (ie, banana, pear, peach, and apple)
Seafood mix (ie, codfish, shrimp, mussel, tuna, salmon)
Grass mix (ie, Bermuda, rye, Timothy, meadow, Johnson, and Bahia grasses)
Tree mix (ie, olive, willow, eucalyptus, white pine, Melaleuca)
Nut mix — routine (ie, peanut, hazelnut, brazil nut, almond, and coconut)
Nut mix — extra (ie, pecan nut, cashew nut, pistachio, and walnut)
Mould mix (ie, Penicillium, Aspergillus fumigatus, Cladosporium, Candida albicans, and Alternaria).
How are IgE levels reported?
The total IgE reference range depends on the age of the individual (it ranges from 0 to 4 kU/L in a newborn and 0 to ~148 kU/L in an older child or adult).
The result of a specific IgE test is reported for a grouped allergen mix or an individual allergen. The table below shows how the results are typically rated and interpreted [2,8,9].
Table. IgE level test ratings and interpretations
Rating of specific IgE level (kUA/L)
Absent or undetectable ( 0.35)
Doubtful significance
Moderate (0.70–3.49)
Very high (17.50–49.99)
Very high (50.00–100.00)
Extremely high (> 100.00)
This table shows arbitrary international reference figures. The actual reference range and grading vary with the laboratory and are based on the method used for the test, calibration, the age of the patient, and the type of allergens.
How are IgE test results interpreted?
IgE test results should be carefully interpreted in the context of a patient’s presentation. High levels of total IgE can occur in allergic conditions, parasitic infections, certain immune-related disorders, and malignancies.
The sensitivity of specific IgE tests ranges from 60% to 95% and the specificity from 30% to 95%, depending upon the type of allergen and the age of the patient [3]. There is a good predictive value (> 90%) for food (cow’s milk, egg, fish, and peanuts), pollens (grass and trees) and dust mites. Tests for some medicines, latex, moulds, and venom have poor sensitivity but greater specificity [3,4]. Note:
A positive test result means sensitisation to an allergen.
The indicated level of IgE may not correlate with the extent or severity of symptoms when exposed to the allergen.
A normal level of IgE may not exclude allergic disorders.
A result may be misleading. False-positive and false-negative results can be due to cross-reactivity, the age of the patient, or the type and duration of exposure to the allergen.
Further evaluation can be done by skin prick testing or by challenging the patient to a specific allergen in vivo.
How does IgE testing compare with skin prick testing?
Skin prick testing is more specific than IgE testing and gives a rapid result (often within 30 minutes), but it requires a trained practitioner and is not always tolerated by young children.
Specific IgE blood tests are simple and safe. They can be expensive, depending on the number of allergens tested. Caution is required when interpreting the results [10].
Karki G. Type I hypersensitivity reaction: mechanism and clinical manifestation. Available at:  (accessed 11 February 2019).
Siles RI, Hsieh FH. Allergy blood testing: A practical guide for clinicians. Cleve Clin J Med 2011; 78: 585–92. doi: 10.3949/ccjm.78a.11023. PubMed
Diaz RC, Liang J, Hallet L, Meyers AD. Diagnostic Allergy Testing: Specific IgE Testing. Updated February 29 2016. Medscape (accessed 7 Jun 2018).
Don’t perform food IgE testing without a history consistent with potential IgE-mediated food allergy. Choosing Wisely. American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. 3 March 2014. Available at: (accessed 5 February 2019).
Food-specific IgE testing should not be performed without a clinical history suggestive of potential IgE-mediated food allergy. Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy. Choosing Wisely. Available at: (accessed 5 February 2019)
Chapman MD. Allergen nomenclature. Clin Allergy Immunol 2008; 21: 47–58. PubMed
Williams P, Sewell WA, Bunn C, Pumphrey R, Read G, Jolles S. Clinical immunology review series: an approach to the use of the immunology laboratory in the diagnosis of clinical allergy. Clin Exp Immunol 2008; 153: 10–8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03695.x. PubMed
Sheldon J, Miller L. Allergy diagnosis reference guide. Clinical Biochemistry, East Kent University Hospitals, NHS. October 2014. P-6.
Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA). Laboratory Tests in the Diagnosis of Allergic Diseases. Updated January 2010. Available at: www.allergy.org.au/health-professionals/papers/tests-in-the-diagnosis-of-allergic-diseases (accessed 8 June 2018).
Australasia Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Infantile Haemangioma Definition And Pathogenesis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/infantile-haemangioma-definition-and-pathogenesis]
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis — extra information
Definition and pathogenesis of infantile proliferative haemangioma, Haemangioma of infancy: What is it?, Strawberry naevus: Definition and pathogenesis, Angiomatous naevus of the skin: What is it?
Blood vessel problems, Diagnosis and testing
Q82.5, D18.0, D18.00, D18.01
2E81.2Y, 2E81.20, 2E81.21
Blood vessel problems
Diagnosis and testing
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated 2012. Revised and updated Dr Arun Gangakhedkar, Paediatrician, Waitemata DHB, Auckland, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. January 2021.
Differential diagnoses
What is infantile haemangioma?
Infantile haemangioma, also known as a strawberry naevus, is the most common benign vascular skin tumour in children. It is noticed in the first few weeks of life.
Infantile haemangioma, face Infantile haemangioma
Who gets infantile haemangioma?
Infantile haemangioma is found in 1–2% of newborns, and up to 10–12% at 1 year of age in Caucasian infants. It is less frequent in non-Caucasian populations. Girls are more commonly affected than boys (3:1).
Risk factors for developing infantile haemangioma include:
Low birth weight increases the risk by 40% for every 500g decrease in birth weight. Infantile haemangioma affects 1 in 4 preterm infants weighing under 1000g.
Maternal factors carrying increased risk include: advanced maternal age, subfertility treatment, multiple pregnancy (eg, twins, triplets), pre-eclampsia, and placenta praevia.
What causes infantile haemangioma?
A placental origin for infantile haemangioma is suggested due to GLUT1 protein expression. Fetal vascular origins are proposed due to the presence of primitive marker CD133 from the fetal cardinal vein.
Defective vascular stem cell regulation involving endothelial progenitor cells (EPC), or extrinsic factors such as hypoxia and developmental vascular field disturbances can influence the development of vascular anomalies.
What are the clinical features of infantile haemangioma?
Infantile haemangiomas are typically solitary and most are located on the head and neck region (60%). Involvement of internal organs is usually indicated by multiple cutaneous lesions. The clinical features are determined by the depth of the lesion, distribution pattern, and phase of growth.
Superficial lesions in the upper dermis are bright red, non-pulsatile, non-tender papules and plaques, and are warm to touch.
Deep lesions in the deeper dermis and subcutaneous tissue were previously called cavernous haemangioma. They are flesh-coloured or blue, non-pulsatile, non-tender masses, and are warm to touch. Compared to the superficial lesions, these tend to appear later and have a late growth phase.
Mixed: features of both superficial and deep forms.
Superficial infantile haemangioma Deep infantile haemangioma Mixed infantile haemangioma
Distribution pattern
Focal (77%) — solitary, discrete, circular, or plaque-like lesion.
Segmental (18%) — plaques in an anatomic or developmental distribution commonly associated with local complications or structural anomalies and continued growth beyond 6 and occasionally 9 months of age (3%).
Multifocal (3%) — several discrete localised lesions distributed over more than one anatomic site.
Indeterminate — the lesions are not definitively focal or segmental.
Focal infantile haemangioma Segmental infantile haemangioma
Prodromal, nascent, or premonitory phase: A precursor lesion can be a circumscribed erythematous macule or paradoxical ischaemic patch (herald patch); have telangiectasia with an ischaemic halo, anaemic or blue-tinged bruise-like discolouration; or can be a blurred swelling.
Initial phase (1–3 weeks age): Loss of typical skin texture with increasing thickness and an indurated appearance by 2–4 weeks of age.
Proliferation phase (1–3 months age): Firm, non-compressible, bright red with infiltration and a mostly exophytic surface growth.
Maturation phase (plateau phase): Raised, bumpy, crimson red lesions reach maximum size by the first birthday. Regression and proliferation may be seen in same lesion.
Regression or involution phase (several years): The bright red colour changes to a dull grey surface associated with flattening, softening, and shrinking from the centre towards the periphery. While a grey stage is suggestive of involutional change, a white infantile haemangioma may be a sign of impending ulceration. The most rapid phase of involution is seen between 1–4 years and approximately 50% of lesions involute by 5 years, 70% by 7 years, and 90% by 9 years of age.
Superficial infantile haemangioma on the scalp Superficial infantile haemangioma starting to regress Superficial infantile haemangioma, further regression
Infantile haemangioma with minimal or arrested growth (IH-MAG) has an abortive or minimal growth in 25% of the lesion’s surface area, appearing as telangiectatic patches with or without papules, lacking a significant proliferative phase. This may be mistaken for a port-wine stain [see Capillary vascular malformation]. Occasionally these can be segmental with syndromic associations. Two-thirds of these lesions are seen over lower limbs.
How is infantile haemangioma diagnosed?
Infantile haemangioma is usually a clinical diagnosis and investigations are not routinely indicated. Investigations may be considered if the diagnosis is uncertain, to define extent and associations, or monitor response to therapy.
Doppler ultrasonography
MRI for suspected anatomical associations such as PHACE, SACRAL, LUMBAR and PELVIS syndromes
Laryngoscopy to investigate stridor with or without beard lesions
For visceral involvement — thyroid and liver function tests, ultrasound of abdomen, MRI or ultrasound of the head, or echocardiogram
Skin biopsy shows uniform vessel morphology with an outer layer of pericytes and inner lining of endothelial cells containing typical microtubular Weibel-Palade bodies
Immunohistochemical staining for GLUT1 confirms a diagnosis of infantile haemangioma, although GLUT1 is also positive in angiosarcoma, epithelioid endothelioma, angiokeratoma, and verrucous haemangioma. Staining is negative in congenital haemangioma and other vascular malformations.
What is the differential diagnosis for infantile haemangioma?
Vascular malformations — are present at birth and persist with no proliferative or involutional phase.
Vascular tumours — include congenital haemangioma, pyogenic granuloma, tufted angioma.
Locally aggressive tumours — Kaposiform haemangioendothelioma, Kaposi sarcoma.
Malignant tumour — angiosarcoma.
Kaposi sarcoma Vascular malformation Angiosarcoma
[see also Infantile haemangioma: Complications and treatment]
Darrow DH, Greene AK, Mancini AJ, Nopper AJ. Diagnosis and management of infantile hemangioma. Pediatrics. 2015;136(4):e1060-104. doi:10.1542/peds.2015-2485. PubMed
Gelmetti C. Vascular birthmarks: A hidden world behind a word. Indian J Paediatr Dermatol. 2018;19:1–8. doi:10.4103/ijpd.IJPD_124_17. Journal
Greenberger S, Bischoff J. Pathogenesis of infantile haemangioma. Br J Dermatol. 2013;169(1):12–9. doi:10.1111/bjd.12435. PubMed
Harter N, Mancini AJ. Diagnosis and management of infantile hemangiomas in the neonate. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019;66(2):437–59. doi:10.1016/j.pcl.2018.12.011. PubMed
Higgins EM, Glover MT. Dermatoses and haemangiomas of infancy. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology, 9th edn. Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 117.16-23.
Soliman YS, Khachemoune A. Infantile hemangiomas: our current understanding and treatment options. Dermatol Online J. 2018;24(9):13030/qt5jt8q9km. PubMed
Capillary vascular malformation
Infantile haemangioma: Complications and treatment
PELVIS and LUMBAR syndromes
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels
Infantile haemangioma — Starship.org.nz
The Hemangioma and Vascular Birthmarks Foundation
The National Organization of Vascular Anomalies
Infantile Hemangioma — Medscape Reference
Haemangioma of infancy — British Association of Dermatologists
Hemangiomas: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Infectious Mononucleosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/infectious-mononucleosis]
Infectious mononucleosis, Epstein Barr virus, glandular fever
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Infectious mononucleosis
Infectious mononucleosis — extra information
Glandular fever, Infective mononucleosis, Monocytic angina, Pfeiffer disease, Mononucleosis syndrome
271558008, 238370005, 238815002, 40168006
Infectious mononucleosis
Author: Dr Sarah Hill, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2007. Updated by Dr Catherine Tian, House Officer Auckland City Hospital. DermNet New Zealand Editor in Chief: Associate A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Medical Editor: Dr Helen Gordon, Auckland, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. August 2020.
Mucocutaneous features
Differential diagnoses
Other diseases caused by Epstein-Barr virus
Submit your photo of infectious mononucleosis
What is infectious mononucleosis?
Infectious mononucleosis is a common infectious disease caused by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It is more commonly known as glandular fever.
Who gets infectious mononucleosis?
Infectious mononucleosis typically affects young adults aged 15–25 years. It is equally common in both sexes and affects all races. Up to nearly 95% of people have had EBV infection by the time they are adults. The disease occurs worldwide with no seasonal predilection.
What causes infectious mononucleosis?
Infectious mononucleosis is a contagious viral infection usually caused by EBV (human herpesvirus-4, HHV4), a gamma-herpesviridae DNA virus. EBV is implicated in a wide range of human diseases, many of which have mucocutaneous manifestations that can be acute or chronic.
Infectious mononucleosis can also be caused by cytomegalovirus (CMV) particularly in an older age group than the EBV-related patients.
How is infectious mononucleosis transmitted?
What are the clinical features of infectious mononucleosis?
Primary infection with EBV
Infectious mononucleosis presents typically in 75% of young adults; 15% have an atypical presentation, and infection in 10% is asymptomatic. Children are often asymptomatic or presumed to have a non-specific viral infection.
There are two typical presentations:
abrupt onset of severe sore throat with cervical lymphadenopathy
gradual onset of low-grade fever, malaise, arthralgia, and myalgia.
Splenomegaly (enlarged spleen), typically in the second and third weeks
Associated abdominal pain or discomfort
Hepatomegaly is rarely clinically palpable although is often detected on ultrasound
Elevation of liver transaminases are common in up to 50%
Overt hepatitis with jaundice and tender hepatomegaly occurs in 5-10%
Older adults are more likely to develop hepatomegaly and jaundice than adolescents.
Arthritis in one or more joints
Peripheral neuritis, optical neuritis
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Interstitial pneumonia
Periorbital and eyelid oedema (Hoagland sign)
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Lymphoproliferative and other autoimmune haematological diseases.
What are the mucocutaneous features of infectious mononucleosis?
The typical exanthem of infectious mononucleosis is an acute, generalised maculopapular rash. The exanthem:
Affects 4.2 to 13% of patients who are not on antibiotics
Is usually faint and non-itchy, appearing first on the trunk and upper arms, extending to involve the face and forearms
May be morbilliform, papular, scarlatiniform, vesicular, or purpuric
A more intense and extensive cutaneous eruption appears in up to 90% of patients with infectious mononucleosis 2–10 days after starting antibiotics. These include ampicillin, azithromycin, amoxicillin, cephalosporins, tetracyclines, and macrolides such as erythromycin. Recent studies suggest the actual rate of this antibiotic rash is much lower than previously reported.
The drug eruption is an itchy maculopapular or morbilliform rash.
It affects extensor surfaces and pressure points, face, neck, trunk, palms, and soles.
It can involve the mucous membranes.
The rash usually resolves within a week of discontinuing the antibiotic.
The drug allergy is usually transient. However, re-exposure to the antibiotic may sometimes result in recurrence of rash years later.
Palatal petechiae are found on the hard and soft palate in 50% of young adults in the first few days of the illness.
Cholestatic jaundice due to liver involvement is itchy, resulting in excoriations and bruising.
Other less commonly reported skin signs of infectious mononucleosis include immune thrombocytopenic purpura, cold urticaria, and erythema nodosum.
Exanthem of infectious mononucleosis Rash due to infectious mononucleosis plus amoxicillin Infectious mononucleosis: urticaria
Following the acute symptomatic phase, EBV persists in memory B cells in the tonsils and peripheral circulation of the infected host in a latent non-lethal carrier state throughout life. Virus can be shed intermittently and infection may reactivate.
How is infectious mononucleosis diagnosed?
The clinical features and a positive heterophile test are usually sufficient to diagnose infectious mononucleosis.
The heterophile antibodies (Monospot)
Heterophile antibodies become positive 2–9 weeks after infection; the sensitivity is 70–92% in the first two weeks.
They can persist for a year or more.
Approximately 40% of children < 4 years of age do not develop heterophile antibodies following primary EBV infection.
Heterophile antibodies are nonspecific and may be present in other infections, malignancies, and autoimmune diseases.
Lymphocyte levels are increased with at least 10% being atypical. Other viral infections tend to have reduced lymphocytes.
Immunoglobulin (Ig)M to viral capsid antigen (VCA) during the active phase of infectious mononucleosis is found in 75% of patients and usually disappears within 4–6 weeks.
Other tests evaluate EBV early antigen (EA) and nuclear antigen (EBNA).
High EBV loads are found by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the oral cavity and blood during the acute cell lytic phase.
Liver function tests often show elevated transaminase levels.
Other tests will depend on which organs are affected by the infection.
Abdominal ultrasonography can evaluate hepatosplenomegaly.
What is the differential diagnosis for infectious mononucleosis?
The main differential diagnoses of acute infectious mononucleosis are:
Acute cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
Adenovirus infection
Acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Other differential diagnoses include streptococcal pharyngitis (which may co-exist), leukaemia, tonsillitis, diphtheria, the common cold, influenza, and COVID-19.
What is the treatment for infectious mononucleosis?
Treatment options for infectious mononucleosis are typically supportive in nature, such as:
Analgesics such as paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID)
Intravenous corticosteroids for airway obstruction, thrombocytopenia, or haemolytic anaemia.
Less common treatment options include:
Antibiotics may be prescribed to treat confirmed secondary bacterial infection.
Can be infectious mononucleosis prevented?
There is currently no vaccine to protect against EBV infection. Prevention involves social hygiene, and avoiding the sharing of drinks, food, or personal items.
What are the complications of infectious mononucleosis?
Infectious mononucleosis complications include:
Group A beta-haemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis
Peritonsillar abscess
Rupture of the spleen – athletes are advised to avoid sport in the first three weeks of illness
Chronic active EBV infection – recurrent or persistent symptoms resembling infectious mononucleosis seen predominantly in Asian children. Life-threatening complications can occur.
What is the prognosis of infectious mononucleosis?
Recovery from the acute phase of the initial EBV infection in healthy and immunocompetent individuals is generally complete in a few weeks, but it can take several months to feel completely well again. Prolonged lethargy, tiredness, and joint pain are common, often lasting 6 months or more.
EBV causes life-long infection as the virus remains dormant in B lymphocytes. Intact immune response prevents progressive disease due to EBV. However, immune suppression or another illness has the potential to reactivate the virus causing vague and subclinical symptoms and, rarely, aggressive disease. During this phase, the virus can be spread to others.
What other diseases can be caused by Epstein-Barr virus?
Other skin manifestations of EBV infection include:
Papular acrodermatitis of childhood (Gianotti-Crosti syndrome)
Urticaria, including cold urticaria
Urticarial vasculitis
Pityriasis lichenoides
Reactive genital ulceration (Lipschütz ulcers)
Linear IgA bullous dermatosis (chronic bullous disease of childhood)
Oral hairy leukoplakia
EBV associated lymphoproliferative disorders including EBV positive mucocutaneous ulcer, lymphomatoid granulomatosis, EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome
Other diseases associated with EBV include:
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Nasal type angiocentric lymphoma.
Andersen Lund BM, Bergan T. Temporary skin reactions to penicillins during the acute stage of infectious mononucleosis. Scand J Infect Dis. 1975;7(1):21–8. doi:10.3109/inf.1975.7.issue-1.04. PubMed
Chovel-Sella A, Ben Tov A, Lahav E, et al. Incidence of rash after amoxicillin treatment in children with infectious mononucleosis. Pediatrics. 2013;131(5):e1424–7. doi:10.1542/peds.2012–1575. PubMed
Dunmire SK, Hogquist KA, Balfour HH. Infectious mononucleosis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;390(Pt 1):211–40. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_9. PubMed Central
Ebell MH. Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis. Am Fam Physician. 2004;70(7):1279–87. PubMed
Hall LD, Eminger LA, Hesterman KS, Heymann WR. Epstein-Barr virus: dermatologic associations and implications: part I. Mucocutaneous manifestations of Epstein-Barr virus and nonmalignant disorders. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(1):1–20. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.07.034. PubMed
Ishii T, Sasaki Y, Maeda T, Komatsu F, Suzuki T, Urita Y. Clinical differentiation of infectious mononucleosis that is caused by Epstein-Barr virus or cytomegalovirus: a single-center case-control study in Japan. J Infect Chemother. 2019;25(6):431–6. doi:10.1016/j.jiac.2019.01.012 Journal
Ónodi-Nagy K, Bata-Csörgo Z, Varga E, Kemény L, Kinyó A. Antibiotic induced cutaneous rash in infectious mononucleosis: overview of the literature. J Allergy Ther 2015;6:222. doi:10.4172/2155-6121.1000222. Journal
Viral skin infections
Papular acrodermatitis of childhood
Epstein–Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders
Infectious mononucleosis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Intertrigo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/intertrigo]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Intertrigo — extra information
Erythema intertrigo, Eczema intertrigo, Superficial dermatitis on opposed skin surfaces
L30.4, B37.2, L08.1, L40.8
EK02.20, 1F23.12, 1F23.13, 1C44, EA80.1, EA80.2, EA90.52
58759008, 238418005, 238411004, 238410003, 23856001, 266158001, 23860000, 402183009
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Revised and updated August 2015. Updated by Janet Dennis, November 2018. Technical Editor: Mary Elaine Luther, Medical Student, Ross University, Barbados. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. January 2020.
Intertrigo describes a rash in the flexures, such as behind the ears, in the folds of the neck, under the arms, under a protruding abdomen, in the groin, between the buttocks, in the finger webs, or in the toe spaces. Although intertrigo can affect only one skin fold, intertrigo commonly involves multiple sites. Intertrigo is a sign of inflammation or infection.
Who gets intertrigo?
Intertrigo can affect males or females of any age. Intertrigo is particularly common in people who are overweight or obese (see metabolic syndrome).
Other contributing factors are:
Genetic tendency to skin disease
Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating)
In infants, napkin dermatitis is a type of intertrigo that primarily occurs due to skin exposure to sweat, urine, and faeces in the diaper area.
Toe-web intertrigo is associated with closed-toe or tight-fitting shoes. Lymphoedema is also a cause for toe-web intertrigo.
What are the clinical features of intertrigo?
Intertrigo can be acute (recent onset), relapsing (recurrent), or chronic (present for more than six weeks). The exact appearance and behaviour depend on the underlying cause(s).
The skin affected by intertrigo is inflamed, reddened, and uncomfortable. The affected skin can become moist and macerated, leading to fissuring (cracks) and peeling.
Intertrigo with secondary bacterial infection (eg, pseudomonas) can cause a foul odour.
What causes intertrigo?
Intertrigo is due to genetic and environmental factors.
Flexural skin has a relatively high surface temperature.
Moisture from insensible water loss and sweating cannot evaporate due to occlusion.
Friction from the movement of adjacent skin results in chafing.
Intertrigo occurs more easily in environments that are hot and humid.
Diabetes, alcohol, and smoking increase the likelihood of intertrigo, especially the infectious form.
The microbiome (microorganisms normally resident on the skin) on flexural skin includes Corynebacterium, other bacteria, and yeasts. Microbiome overgrowth in warm moist environments can cause intertrigo.
Intertrigo is classified into infectious and inflammatory origins, but they often overlap.
Infections tend to be unilateral and asymmetrical.
Atopic dermatitis is usually bilateral and symmetrical, affecting the flexures of the neck, knees and elbows.
Other inflammatory disorders also tend to be symmetrical affecting the armpits, groins, under the breasts, and the abdominal folds.
Infections causing intertrigo
Thrush: Candida albicans
Characterised by its rapid development
Itchy, moist, peeling, red and white skin
Small superficial papules and pustules
Intertrigo due to candida infection
Erythrasma: Corynebacterium minutissimum
Persistent brown patches
Asymptomatic (painless and non-itchy)
Tinea: Trichophyton rubrum + T. interdigitale
Tinea cruris (groin) and athletes foot (between toes)
Slowly spreads over weeks to months
Irregular annular plaques
Impetigo: Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes
Moist blisters and crusts on a red base
Contagious, so other family members may also be affected
Boils: Staphylococcus aureus
Very painful follicular papules and nodules
Central pustule or abscess
Folliculitis: Staphylococcus aureus
Superficial tender red papules
Pustules centred on hair follicles
Can be provoked by shaving, waxing, epilation.
Folliculitis in axilla
Skin inflammations causing intertrigo
Well-defined, smooth or shiny red patches
Common in submammary and groin creases
Symmetrical involvement
May fissure (crack) in the crease
Red patches on other sites are scaly
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Ill-defined salmon-pink thin patches
Common in axilla and groin creases
Fluctuates in severity
Red patches on the face and scalp tend to be flaky.
Intertrigo due to seborrhoeic dermatitis
First occurs in infancy
Common in elbow and knee creases
Characterised by flares
Acute eczema is red, blistered, swollen
Chronic eczema is dry, thickened, lined (lichenified).
Acute, relapsing or chronic
Body fluids: sweat, urine
Friction due to movement and clothing
Dryness due to antiperspirant
The allergen may be:
Fragrance, preservative or medicament in deodorant, wet-wipe or other product
Component of underwear (rubber in elastic, nickel in bra wire).
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Boil-like follicular papules and nodules
Discharging sinuses and scars
Intertrigo due to hidradenitis suppurativa in axilla
Hailey-Hailey disease
Intermittent painful shallow blisters that quickly break down
Rare inherited condition
Often starts age 20–40 years
Most troublesome during summer months
Intertrigo due to Hailey-Hailey disease
Granular parakeratosis
Red-brown scaly rash
A biopsy is essential for diagnosis.
Granular parakeratosis
Dome-shaped follicular papules in armpits
Asymptomatic or itchy
Excoriations and lichenification eventually occur as a result of scratching.
Axillary Fox-Fordyce disease
Common in persons wearing tight-fitting shoes
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most common organism
Mild toe-web intertrigo presents with erythema and scaling (athlete's foot)
Chronic intertrigo (longer than six months) causes burning pain, exudation, maceration, and inability to move the toes
A serious complication is cellulitis, often spreading to ankles and knees.
What investigations should be done?
Investigations may be necessary to determine the cause of intertrigo.
A swab for microscopy and culture of bacteria (microbiology)
A scraping for microscopy and culture of fungi (mycology)
A skin biopsy may be performed for histopathology if the skin condition is unusual or fails to respond to treatment.
What is the treatment for intertrigo?
Treatment depends on the underlying cause if identified, and on which micro-organisms are present in the rash. Combinations are common.
Physical exertion should be followed by bathing and completely drying skin flexures. A hairdryer on cool setting is an effective approach for drying underarms and breasts.
Sweating can be reduced with an antiperspirant cream or powder.
Bacterial infection may be treated with topical antibiotics such as fusidic acid cream or mupirocin ointment, or oral antibiotics such as flucloxacillin, cephalexin, or erythromycin.
Yeasts and fungi may be treated with topical antifungals such as clotrimazole and terbinafine cream or oral antifungal agents such as itraconazole or terbinafine.
Inflammatory skin diseases are often treated with low potency topical steroid creams such as hydrocortisone. More potent steroids are best avoided in the flexures because they can cause skin thinning, resulting in stretch marks (striae atrophicae) and rarely, ulcers. Calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus ointment or pimecrolimus cream are also effective in skin folds.
Janniger CK, Schwartz RA, Szepietowski JC, Reich A. Intertrigo and common secondary skin infections. Am Fam Physician 2005; 1; 72: 833–8. Journal
Tüzün Y, Wolf R, Baglam S, Engin B. Diaper (napkin) dermatitis: a fold (intertriginous) dermatosis. Clin Dermatol 2015; 33: 477–82. PubMed
De Britto LJ, Yuvaraj J, Kamaraj P, Poopathy S, Vijayalakshmi G. Risk factors for chronic intertrigo of the lymphedema leg in southern India: a case-control study. Int J Low Extrem Wounds 2015; 14: 377–83. doi: 10.1177/1534734615604289.PubMed
Martín EG, Sánchez RM, Herrera AE, Umbert MP. Topical tacrolimus for the treatment of psoriasis on the face, genitalia, intertriginous areas and corporal plaques. J Drugs Dermatol 2006; 5: 334–6. PubMed
Weidner T, Tittelbach J, Illing T, Elsner P. Gram‐negative bacterial toe web infection–a systematic review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2018; 32: 39–47. PubMed
Skin diseases and conditions affecting body folds
Intertrigo — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Intraepidermal Squamous Cell Carcinoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/intraepidermal-squamous-cell-carcinoma]
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma, intraepidermal SCC, Bowen's disease
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma — extra information
Bowen disease of skin, IEC of skin, Superficial SCC of skin, Carcinoma in situ of the skin, Intraepidermal SCC of skin, Intraepidermal carcinoma of skin, SCC in situ of skin
Lesions (cancerous), Diagnosis and testing
Diagnosis and testing
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma
Last reviewed: May 2023
Author(s): A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (1997). Updated Nov 2017; further update Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, United Kingdom (2023)
What is intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma?
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a common superficial form of keratinocyte cancer. It is also known as Bowen disease, intraepidermal carcinoma (IEC) and carcinoma in situ (SCC in situ).
Intraepidermal SCC is derived from squamous cells, the flat epidermal cells that make keratin, the horny protein that makes up skin, hair and nails. ‘Intraepidermal’ and ‘in situ’ mean the malignant cells are confined to the tissue of origin, in this case, the epidermis.
Who gets intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma?
Risk factors for intraepidermal SCC include:
Sun exposure: intraepidermal SCC is most often found in sun-damaged individuals.
Arsenic ingestion: intraepidermal SCC is common in populations exposed to arsenic.
Ionising radiation: intraepidermal SCC was common on unprotected hands of radiologists early in the 20th century.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection: this is implicated in intraepidermal SCC on fingers and fingernails.
Immune suppression due to disease (eg chronic lymphocytic leukaemia) or medicines (eg azathioprine, ciclosporin).
Up to 50% of patients with intraepidermal SCC have other keratinocytic skin cancers, mainly basal cell carcinoma.
What causes intraepidermal SCC?
Ultraviolet radiation (UV) is the main cause of intraepidermal SCC. It damages the skin cell nucleic acids (DNA), resulting in a mutant clone of the gene p53, setting off uncontrolled growth of the skin cells. UV also suppresses the immune response, preventing recovery from damage.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is another major cause of intraepidermal SCC. Oncogenic strains of HPV are the main cause of squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL), that is, squamous cell carcinoma in situ in mucosal tissue.
What are the clinical features of intraepidermal SCC?
Intraepidermal SCC presents as one or more irregular scaly plaques of up to several centimetres in diameter. They are often an orange-red colour but may also be brown.
Although intraepidermal SCC may arise on any area of skin, it is most often diagnosed on sun-exposed sites of the ears, face, hands and lower legs. When there are many plaques, distribution is not symmetrical (unlike psoriasis).
Squamous cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma
Intraepidermal SCC may start to grow under a nail when it results in a red streak (erythronychia) that later may destroy the nail plate.
Bowen disease of nail Bowen disease of nail Squamous cell carcinoma in situ
Complications of intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma
How is intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed?
Intraepidermal SCC is often recognised clinically. Dermatoscopy of a red scaly irregular plaque is supportive if it reveals crops of rounded and coiled blood vessels.
Diagnosis may be confirmed by biopsy; histology reveals full thickness dysplasia of the epidermis.
What is the treatment for intraepidermal SCC?
As intraepidermal SCC is confined to the surface of the skin, there are various ways to remove it. Recurrence rates are high, whatever method is used, particularly in immune suppressed patients.
As the risk of invasive SCC is low, it may not be necessary to remove all lesions, particularly in elderly patients. Keratolytic emollients containing urea or salicylic acid may be sufficient to improve symptoms.
Solitary lesions can be cut out, and the defect repaired by stitching it up. Excision is often recommended if there is suspicion of invasive SCC.
Superficial skin surgery
Superficial skin surgery refers to shave, curettage and electrosurgery, and is an excellent choice for solitary or few hyperkeratotic lesions. The lesion is sliced off or scraped out; then the base is cauterised. Dressings are applied to the open wound to encourage moist wound healing over the next few weeks.
Cryotherapy means removing a lesion by freezing it, usually with liquid nitrogen. Moderately aggressive cryotherapy is suitable for multiple, small, flat patches of intraepidermal SCC. It leaves a permanent white mark at the site of treatment.
5-fluorouracil cream contains a cytotoxic agent and can be applied to multiple lesions. The cream may be used for intraepidermal SCC for four weeks and repeated if necessary. It causes a vigorous skin reaction that may ulcerate. A combination product of 5-fluorouracil with calcipotriol, used twice daily for 5-10 days, had favourable response rates over monotherapy.
Imiquimod cream is an immune response modifier used off-licence to treat intraepidermal SCC. It is applied 3–5 times weekly for 4–16 weeks and causes an inflammatory reaction.
Photodynamic therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) refers to treatment with a photosensitiser (a porphyrin chemical) that is applied to the affected area before exposing it to a strong source of visible light. The treated area develops an inflammatory reaction and then heals over a couple of weeks or so. The best studied, methyl levulinate cream PDT used off licence, provides high cure rates for intraepidermal SCC on the face or lower legs, with excellent cosmetic results. The main disadvantage is the pain experienced by many patients during treatment.
Other treatments occasionally used in the treatment of intraepidermal SCC include:
Combination treatments
Topical retinoid (tazarotene, tretinoin)
Electron beam therapy
Carbon dioxide laser ablation
Erbium:YAG laser ablation
Oral retinoid (acitretin, isotretinoin)
How can intraepidermal SCC be prevented?
Meticulous sun protection at any time of life can reduce the number of intraepidermal SCCs and is particularly important for ageing, sun-damaged white skin; and in patients that are immune suppressed by disease, for example with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, or by medications.
Stay indoors or under the shade in the middle of the day.
Wear covering clothing.
Apply high protection SPF50+, broad-spectrum sunscreens generously to exposed skin if outdoors.
Avoid indoor tanning (sun beds and solaria).
What is the outlook for intraepidermal SCC?
Intraepidermal SCC may recur months or years after treatment. The same procedure can be repeated or another method used.
Patients that have been treated for intraepidermal SCC are at risk of developing new lesions of intraepidermal SCC. They are also at increased risk of other skin cancers, especially squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma and melanoma.
British Association of Dermatologists’ guidelines for the management of squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen’s disease) 2022 — British Association of Dermatologists
Loranger N, Mirza FN, Lee T, et al. Combined topical 5-fluorouracil and calcipotriene effectively treats superficial keratinocyte carcinomas: A retrospective cohort study from 2 academic centers. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;92(3):610-612. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2024.10.074. Pubmed
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma pathology
Skin cancers and precancers — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Bowen disease — Medscape
Bowen's disease — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Intralesional Steroid Injection]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/intralesional-steroid-injection]
Intralesional steroid injection
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Intralesional steroid injection
Intralesional steroid injection — extra information
Intralesional corticosteroid injection
27581000, 426734007, 293174009, 403652001
Intralesional steroid injection
Author: Dr Chin-Yun Lin, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2012.
Side effects at site
Systemic side effects
What is an intralesional steroid injection?
An intralesional steroid injection involves a corticosteroid such as triamcinolone acetonide injected directly into a lesion on or immediately below the skin.
In New Zealand, triamcinolone injection is marketed as Kenacort-A and is available in 2 strengths: 10 mg per ml (Kenacort-A 10) and 40 mg per ml (Kenacort-A 40). Triamcinolone acetonide is marketed as Kenalog in the USA. Betamethasone injection is marketed as Celestone Chronodose (1 mL) and is not available in New Zealand.
Shorter-acting corticosteroid preparations, such as dexamethasone or betamethasone acetate, are sometimes administered in combination with triamcinolone.
What are intralesional steroids used for?
An intralesional steroid injection may be indicated for the following skin conditions:
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Keloid/hypertrophic scar
Other granulomatous disorders such as cutaneous sarcoidosis or granuloma faciale
Hypertrophic lichen planus
Lichen simplex chronicus (neurodermatitis)
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Acne cysts (see nodulocystic acne) and inflamed epidermoid cysts
Small infantile haemangiomas
Other localised inflammatory skin diseases.
Hair regrowth after intralesional steroid into alopecia areata
Intralesional steroid injection for alopecia areata
What are the benefits of intralesional steroids?
Intralesional administration of corticosteroids treats a dermal inflammatory process directly. In contrast to topical steroids, intralesional steroids:
Bypass the barrier of a thickened stratum corneum
Reduce the chance of epidermal atrophy (surface skin thinning)
Deliver higher concentrations to the site of the pathology.
Other uses for triamcinolone acetonide injection
Triamcinolone injection is also sometimes used intramuscularly (rather than as an intralesional injection) systemically as an alternative to oral corticosteroids, for example for seasonal hay fever, or to treat a chronic skin disorder such as atopic dermatitis or lichen planus.
Typical intramuscular doses are 0.5–1 mg/kg body weight (40–80 mg for a typical adult), which may be repeated every 30 days for 3–6 months.
Triamcinolone injections can also be used in the treatment of tendonitis, arthritis, and synovitis.
What are the contraindications to intralesional steroid injection?
Intralesional steroids should not be injected at the site of active skin infection (eg, impetigo or herpes simplex).
They must not be used if there is a known triamcinolone allergy.
When large doses of triamcinolone acetonide are used as an alternative to oral steroids such as prednisone, they are considered to be systemic steroids. These should be avoided in patients with the following disorders:
Active tuberculosis or systemic fungal infection
Extensive plaque psoriasis, pustular psoriasis or erythrodermic psoriasis — systemic steroids may destabilise psoriasis
Active peptic ulcer disease
Uncontrolled diabetes, heart failure or severe hypertension
Severe depression or psychosis
How is intralesional steroid administered?
Intralesional triamcinolone is injected directly into the skin lesion using a fine needle after cleaning the site of injection with alcohol or antiseptic solution. The injection should be intradermal, not subcutaneous, to avoid causing a dent in the skin.
The initial dose per injection site will vary depending on the lesion being treated. Generally, 0.1–0.2 mL is injected per square centimetre of involved skin. The total dose should not normally exceed 1–2 mL per dose. It can be repeated every 4–8 weeks.
The corticosteroid can be full strength (eg, triamcinolone 10 mg/mL or 40 mg/mL) or diluted with normal saline or local anaesthetic. Typical regimes for triamcinolone intralesional injections include:
40 mg/mL for a thick keloid scar
10 mg/mL for a moderate thickness hypertrophic scar
10 mg/ml into discoid lupus erythematosus or granuloma annulare
5 mg/ml into the skin of normal thickness associated with alopecia areata.
The injections may be repeated monthly for a few months while the lesions are active.
Intralesional steroid injection Intralesional steroid injection
What side effects may arise at the site of an intralesional steroid injection?
Side effects and risks of intralesional triamcinolone may be separated into early and delayed effects.
Early effects tend to be self-limited. They include:
Pain, bleeding, bruising
Impaired wound healing
Sterile abscess, sometimes requiring surgical drainage.
Delayed adverse effects include:
Cutaneous and subcutaneous lipoatrophy (most common) — skin indentations or dimples around the injection sites a few weeks after treatment; these may be permanent
White marks (leukoderma) or brown marks (postinflammatory pigmentation) at the site of injection or spreading from the site of injection; these may resolve or persist long term
Telangiectasia at the site of injection, which can be treated if necessary by laser or intense pulsed light (IPL).
Localised hypertrichosis; this resolves eventually.
Localised or distant steroid acne: steroids increase growth hormone, leading to increased sebum production by the sebaceous glands. Steroid acne generally improves once the steroid has been stopped.
Lipoatrophy Subcutaneous fat and muscle atrophy with hypopigmentation Leukoderma
Systemic side effects of triamcinolone injections
Other systemic side-effects are not likely to follow the intralesional injection of localised skin disease because the dose used is very small.
The following potentially serious conditions have been reported from intramuscular injection of large doses of triamcinolone acetonide.
Heart: congestive heart failure in susceptible patients, fluid retention, hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias.
Hormonal effects: decreased glucose tolerance, Cushing syndrome, hirsutism, hypertrichosis, diabetes mellitus, menstrual irregularities, adrenocortical and pituitary unresponsiveness, and the suppression of growth in children.
Musculoskeletal disease: aseptic necrosis of hip or shoulder bones, calcinosis, osteoporosis and pathological fractures, muscle weakness, and tendon rupture.
Neurologic/psychiatric symptoms: convulsions, depression, euphoria, swelling of the brain, insomnia, and mood swings.
Eyes: glaucoma, cataracts, and rare instances of blindness associated with periocular injections.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
J.L. Bolognia, J.L. Jorizzo. Dermatology, 2nd edition. Elsevier Limited 2008.
Rxlist. Kenalog 10 injection. Accessed 26th Feb 2012.
J.K. Robinson et al. Surgery of the Skin – Procedural Dermatology, 2nd Edition. Elsevier Inc 2010.
Corticosteroid Injections of Joints and Soft Tissues. Medscape Reference. Accessed 26 Feb 2012.
Intralesional injection
Injected skin treatments
Intralesional Steroid Therapy — British Association of Dermatologists
Watch & Learn: Intralesional injections. Youtube video. The Journal of Family Practice.
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Irritant Contact Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/irritant-contact-dermatitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
110979008, 425630003, 402584005, 402290005
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003; Updated: Dr Kajal Patel, Research Fellow, Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre, Carlton, Australia; A/Prof Rosemary Nixon AM, Dermatologist and Occupational Physician, Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre, Carlton, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
Hand dermatitis due to wet work
Factors influencing the development and severity of the dermatitis include:
Concentration, amount, and properties of the irritant
Duration and frequency of exposure, for example short concentrated or repeated prolonged low exposure
Skin susceptibility such as pre-existing skin damage or atopic tendency
Mechanical trauma including hand scrubbing
Environmental factors such as temperature extremes or humidity.
Resembles dermatitis of any cause
Is the commonest cause of hand dermatitis in occupational and non-occupational settings
Burning and pain more common symptoms than itch
Acute due to a single severe exposure
Localised well-defined, redness, papules, swelling, blistering (vesicles/bullae)
Example: kneeling in wet cement, which is very alkaline, causing severe dermatitis of the knees
Chronic due to mild irritants or repetitive cumulative exposure
Initial dryness and cracking of the skin
Evolves to include inflammatory changes with redness and itch
May develop tolerance or hardening with time
Examples include dribble rash, napkin dermatitis, housewife’s eczema, ring dermatitis
Sentinel sign DERMATITIS
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Erythema of dermatitis may be more difficult to observe in darker skin types, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is more common after resolution of the dermatitis.
Sentinel sign Irritant hand dermatitis Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation following irritant hand dermatitis
Disseminated secondary eczema
Secondary bacterial infection
Other causes of hand dermatitis such as atopic hand dermatitis
Avoidance of all potential irritants
Specific treatments for some chemical irritants eg, calcium gluconate gel for hydrogen fluoride burn
Topical medications — topical steroids, calcineurin inhibitors, crisaborole
Occupational skin disease
Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre, Australia
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Isotretinoin]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/isotretinoin]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Isotretinoin — extra information
13-cis-retinoic acid, Accutane, Roaccutane, Oratane, Abscoria, Claravis
Treatments, Follicular disorder
387208003, 38314008, 428131004, 723947007, 292669009, 4294646002
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999. Updated by Dr Amanda Oakley; Hon A/Prof Marius Rademaker, February 2016. Minor amendment by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist. November 2025.
General side effects and risks
Cutaneous side effects
Managing side effects
Dose-related side effects
Contraption considerations for women
Isotretinoin and pregnancy
Contraption considerations for men
Precautions for pilots
What is isotretinoin?
Isotretinoin (13-cis retinoic acid) is a vitamin-A derivative (retinoid). The liver naturally makes small quantities of isotretinoin from vitamin-A, but the prescribed drug is made synthetically.
Isotretinoin was developed in the 1950s, but only started being used in the mid 1970s. The original brand names were Accutane® and Roaccutane®, but there are now many generic versions on the market, of varying potency. In New Zealand, oral isotretinoin is available as 5 mg, 10 mg and 20 mg capsules (Oratane® brand). It is funded by PHARMAC on Special Authority application.
What is isotretinoin used for?
Isotretinoin is a very effective medication for the treatment of acne. Originally licensed for use in severe disease, it is increasingly prescribed for all grades of acne.
Isotretinoin is also useful for other follicular conditions, such as:
Hidradenitis suppurativa
It is also prescribed off-label for many other skin diseases. Examples include:
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Extensive actinic keratoses
Prevention of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
It has also been used as an adjuvant in neuroblastoma.
Contraindications to isotretinoin
Isotretinoin must not be taken in pregnancy, or if there is a significant risk of pregnancy.
Blood donation by males and females on isotretinoin is not allowed in case the blood is used for a pregnant woman.
There has been controversy regarding the use of isotretinoin in peanut allergic individuals - isotretinoin contains purified soya oil (where there is a possible risk of cross sensitivity) and in a study of 60 peanut sensitive individuals, none had a reaction to oral isotretinoin exposure.
Precautions when taking isotretinoin
Isotretinoin should be used with caution during breastfeeding.
Commercial pilots may be subject to flying restrictions if they take isotretinoin.
High dose isotretinoin in very young children has been associated with premature epiphyseal closure, leading to shorter stature (this is not seen in the low dose used for the treatment of acne).
How does isotretinoin work?
In acne, isotretinoin:
Reduces sebum production
Shrinks the sebaceous glands
Reduces follicular occlusion
Inhibits the growth of bacteria
Has anti-inflammatory properties.
What is the usual dose of isotretinoin?
The range of doses used each day for acne is less than 0.1 to over 1 mg/kg body weight. Some patients may only need a small dose once or twice a week. A course of treatment may be completed in a few months or continue for several years. For acne, some prescribers have targeted a total cumulative dose of 120–140 mg/kg, in the hope of reducing relapse, but the evidence for this remains controversial. The general trend has been to use lower dosages, unrelated to body weight (eg, 10 mg/day).
The individual dose prescribed by the dermatologist depends on:
Prescriber preference
The specific condition being treated
The severity of the skin condition
Response to treatment
Other treatment used at the same time
Side effects experienced.
Isotretinoin is better taken with water or milk after food to help with its absorption. It may be taken on an empty stomach, but absorption may be halved. There is no particular advantage in splitting the dose over the day. A newer formulation (isotretinoin-lidose) can be taken without food.
For how long is isotretinoin taken?
Most patients should be treated until their skin condition clears and then for a further few months. However, courses have often been restricted to 16–30 weeks (4–7 months) to minimise the risk of teratogenicity (risk of congenital abnormalities), and to comply with local regulatory authorities. Isotretinoin may be prescribed for years, usually in low dose or intermittently.
Drug interactions with isotretinoin
Care should be taken with the following medications:
Vitamin-A (retinoic acid): side effects are cumulative and could be severe. Beta-carotene (provitamin-A) is permitted.
Tetracyclines (including doxycycline, minocycline): these could increase the risk of headaches and blurred vision due to raised intracranial pressure.
Warfarin: monitor INR carefully.
What are the side effects and risks of isotretinoin?
The side effects of isotretinoin are dose dependent; at 1 mg/kg/day, nearly all patients will have some side effects, whereas, at 0.1 mg/kg/day, most patients will not. The range and severity of the side effects also depend on personal factors and the disease being treated.
Patients with significant liver or kidney disease, high blood fats, diabetes and depression may be advised not to take isotretinoin or to be on a lower dose than usual and to have regular follow-up visits.
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous side effects
Most of the side effects due to isotretinoin are cutaneous or mucocutaneous and relate to the mode of action of the drug. When side effects are troublesome, isotretinoin may need to be withheld or the dose reduced. The most common side effects are listed here:
Acne flare-up (particularly if starting dose is > 0.5 mg/kg/day)
Dry lips, cheilitis (sore, cracked or scaly lips) (100% of patients on 1 mg/kg/day)
Dry skin, fragile skin, eczema/dermatitis (itchy, red patches of skin)
Note: atopic eczema may improve.
Dry nostrils, epistaxis (nose bleeds)
Dry anal mucosa, bleeding at the time of a bowel motion
Dry genitals, dyspareunia (discomfort during intercourse)
Sunburn on exposure to the sun
Skin infections: impetigo, acute paronychia.
Acne flare Granulomas Impetigo Cheilitis Sunburn
Treatment of mucocutaneous side effects
Reduce the dosage (eg, to 5–10 mg/day).
Emollients, lip balm, petroleum jelly, sunscreen, eye drops and lubricants should be applied frequently and liberally when needed.
Dermatitis can be treated with topical steroids.
Take short, cool showers without using soap.
Use mild or diluted shampoo.
Do not have elective eye surgery while on isotretinoin or for 6 months afterwards.
Do not have mechanical dermabrasion or ablative laser treatments (eg, CO2 resurfacing) while on isotretinoin or for 6 months afterwards. Other laser and light treatments may be performed with care.
Shave rather than wax.
Topical and/or oral antibiotics may be prescribed for impetigo.
Other dose-related side effects of isotretinoin
Myalgia (muscle aches) and arthralgia (joint aches), especially after exercise.
Tiredness (lethargy and drowsiness).
Disturbed night vision and slow adaptation to the dark. Drivers may experience increased glare from car headlights at night.
Hypertriglyceridaemia (high levels of triglyceride in the blood), usually of no clinical relevance.
Irregular or heavy menstrual periods.
Rare side effects of isotretinoin
The causality of the listed side effects may not have been confirmed.
Severe headache with blurred vision due to raised intracranial pressure.
Mood changes and depression. Note: depression is more often related to the skin condition being treated or other health or psychosocial problems. Antidepressant medications may be helpful. See Isotretinoin and mood below.
Sexual dysfunction (eg, erectile dysfunction and decreased libido) — a large review study has refuted this association.
Corneal opacities and cataracts.
Accelerated diffuse interstitial skeletal hyperostosis (bony change).
Abnormal liver function tests or symptomatic hepatitis.
Diarrhoea or bleeding from the bowel. A large review suggested that use of isotretinoin for over a year may increase the risk inflammatory bowel disease development.
Allergy to isotretinoin causing liver disease and a febrile illness.
Treatment of systemic side effects
Drink minimal alcohol.
Take paracetamol for headache and for mild aches and pains.
Seek medical attention early, if unwell.
Isotretinoin and mood
The effect of isotretinoin on mood is a very controversial area; the majority of acne sufferers have improved mood commensurate with the improvement in their acne. Rarely, isotretinoin induces depression and low mood, when on stopping the drug, depression lifts but returns with reintroduction of the medication. Acne itself can be the source of distress, anxiety and depression. In rare instances, suicidal ideation and completed suicide occurs during isotretinoin treatment, but this can also rarely be the case in people taking antibiotics for acne, so it is difficult to be certain whether the changes are due to the disease, scarring, the drug, or something else.
The largest meta-analysis reviewing the data of 1.6 million people identified the 1 year absolute risk of suicide, suicidal ideation, completed suicide, and self harm to be less than 0.5% each. The risk of depression was 3.8%. These rates were lower than those observed in the general adolescent population, suggesting no increased relative risk of psychiatric conditions in isotretinoin users.In the 2-4 years after isotretinoin, the psychiatric illness rate was lower than those who had not had isotretinoin. There was a slightly increased risk of depression in those who had isotretinoin and had a past history of depression.Additionally, a large Danish study of adolescents reported no association between either topical or oral retinoids and suicide attempts. Despite these findings, patients and their families should remain aware of rare psychiatric events and ensure ongoing monitoring by healthcare providers.
Monitoring isotretinoin
Pregnancy must be excluded before and during treatment with isotretinoin.
In an otherwise healthy individual, blood tests are generally not needed, but monitoring may be a variable prescribing requirement in some countries. If using high dose isotretinoin (1 mg/kg/day), a prolonged course (> 12 months), or if a patient has specific risk factors (eg, family history of dyslipidaemia, viral hepatitis, or high alcohol intake), these tests are indicated prior to treatment and at intervals:
Cholesterol and triglyceride levels
Liver function tests
Contraception in females considering isotretinoin
Isotretinoin must not be taken in pregnancy because of a very high risk of serious congenital abnormalities in the baby. Caution needs to be used during breastfeeding as it enters the breast milk and might affect the baby.
All females who could biologically have a child should take the following precautions during treatment with isotretinoin and for four weeks after the medication has been discontinued:
Abstinence. The most reliable method of avoiding pregnancy is not to have sex. No method of contraception is completely reliable. "Natural" family planning is particularly risky.
If sexually active, two reliable methods of contraception should be used. Discuss contraception with your doctor (general practitioner, family planning specialist, gynaecologist or dermatologist). The combined oral contraceptive, IUD (intrauterine device), a progesterone implant, or medroxyprogesterone injection may be suitable.
The low-dose progesterone mini-pill on its own is not recommended.
A prescription for emergency contraception may be available from a medical practitioner (GP or family planning clinic) or accredited pharmacy. It prevents 85% of pregnancies if taken within 72 hours of unprotected sexual intercourse.
If contraception fails, termination of pregnancy (an abortion) may be advised if pregnancy arises during treatment with isotretinoin or within a month of discontinuing it.
What happens if a pregnant woman takes isotretinoin?
Isotretinoin has a very high chance of resulting in a spontaneous miscarriage or a severe birth deformity if a fetus is exposed to it during the first half of pregnancy. The deformities affect the growth of tissues developing at the time of exposure to the drug:
Cranium (skull and brain)
No contraceptive precautions are necessary for men
Isotretinoin has no effect on sperm or male fertility and has not been shown to cause birth defects in children fathered by men taking it.
Does acne ever fail to clear on isotretinoin?
Although isotretinoin is usually very effective for acne, occasionally it responds unexpectedly slowly and incompletely. Poor response is associated with:
Macrocomedones (large whiteheads)
Nodules (large, deep inflammatory lesions)
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Younger age (< 14 years).
Options available to slow responders include:
Electrocautery of comedones
A prolonged course of isotretinoin
Additional treatment with oral antibiotics and oral steroids.
Can isotretinoin be used again if acne recurs?
At least fifty percent of patients with acne have a long-lasting response after a single adequate course of isotretinoin. In others, acne may recur a few months to a few years after the medication has been discontinued. Relapse is more common in females than in males, and in patients > 25 years of age. These patients may receive further courses of isotretinoin.
Long-term treatment (> 1 year) is often used for patients with:
Special precautions for pilots considering isotretinoin
Good night vision is important for airline pilots and those flying after dark. Night vision may be affected by isotretinoin. Pilots taking isotretinoin or considering a course of isotretinoin must report to their national aviation authority to discuss how this treatment affects their flying privileges.
In New Zealand, this is the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand. Civil aviation licence holders, including Air Traffic Controllers, have an obligation under section 27 C of the Civil Aviation Act to ground self and report to CAA in case of any change in medical condition that may affect flight safety. CAA considers the use of isotretinoin to be a change in medical condition.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Advice on the safe introduction and continued use of isotretinoin in acne in the UK 2010 – MJD Goodfield, NH Cox, A Bowser, JC McMillan, LG Millard, NB Simpson, AD Ormerod, BJD, Vol. 162, No. 5, June 2010 (p1172–9)
Heerfordt, I. M., Tulstrup, M., & Horwitz, H. (2025). No association between acne treatment with retinoids and suicide attempts in adolescents: A case-control study. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 92(3), 583–585. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2024.10.043. Journal
Mollan SP, Woodcock M, Siddiqi R, Huntbach J, Good P, Scott RA. Does use of isotretinoin rule out a career in flying? Br J Ophthalmol. 2006 Aug;90(8):957–9. PubMed.
Ruth E, Heraghty F, Flynn N, et al. No evidence of isotretinoin sensitization in peanut-allergic children: a cross-sectional study. Br J Dermatol. 2023;189(4):481-482. PubMed
Tan NKW, Tang A, MacAlevey NCYL, Tan BKJ, Oon HH. Risk of Suicide and Psychiatric Disorders Among Isotretinoin Users: A Meta-Analysis [published correction appears in JAMA Dermatol. 2024 Jan 1;160(1):118]. JAMA Dermatol. 2024;160(1):54-62. PubMed
Ahmed A, Liaquat A, Raza S, et al. Association of inflammatory bowel disease incidence with isotretinoin usage: A meta-analysis and systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2024;91(5):949-951. PubMed
Neubauer ZJK, Lipner SR. No association between isotretinoin and sexual dysfunction in a large retrospective cohort study of acne patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;93(3):802-803. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2025.05.1366. Journal
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements — MedlinePlus
Isotretinoin — British Association of Dermatologists
Isotretinoin: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Isotretinoin — SafeRx
Isotretinoin — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Janus Kinase Inhibitors]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/janus-kinase-inhibitors]
Janus kinase inhibitors
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Janus kinase inhibitors
Janus kinase inhibitors — extra information
Treatments, Systemic diseases
704312008, 734606006
Janus kinase inhibitors
Last Reviewed: July, 2025
Authors: Nancy Huang (MBChB), DermNet Medical Writer, New Zealand (2025); Dr Estella Janz-Robinson, Dermatology Registrar, Australia (2021); Hana Numan, DermNet Medical Writer, NZ (2022 and 2023). Minor update November 2025.Peer reviewed by: Dr Vidette Wong, Specialist doctor, United Kingdom (2025)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department.
Contraindications and precautions
Side effects and risks
What are Janus kinase inhibitors?
Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, also called jakinibs or JAKis, are small molecules that interrupt the JAK-STAT (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription) signalling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of many immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (IMIDs).
What are Janus kinase inhibitors used for?
Janus kinase inhibitors have shown beneficial effects in a variety of immune-mediated conditions.
JAK inhibitors have also been used successfully in conditions with JAK mutations such as polycythaemia vera, essential thrombocythaemia, and myelofibrosis.
Non-dermatological uses of Janus kinase inhibitors
Ankylosing spondylitis
Giant cell arteritis
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease.
Dermatological uses of Janus kinase inhibitors
Janus kinase inhibitors have been approved for use in or are currently under investigation for the following indications:
Oral abrocitinib, baricitinib, upadacitinib
Topical delgocitinib
Oral baricitinib, deuruxolitinib, ritlecitinib, tofacitinib
Oral ruxolitinib, tofacitinib, upadacitinib
Oral deucravacitinib
Oral tofacitinib for nail psoriasis
Oral baricitinib, delgocitinib, filotinib, itacitinib, peficitinib, tofacitinib
Topical brepocitinib, ruxolitinib
Chronic hand dermatitis
Topical delgocitinib
Oral baricitinib ruxolitinib, tofacitinib, upadacitinib
Graft versus host disease (GVHD)
Oral baricitinib, itacitinib, ruxolitinib
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Lichen planus/lichen planopilaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus/discoid lupus erythematosus
Oral baricitinib, deucravacitinib, elsubrutinib, tofacitinib, upadacitinib
Granulomatous disorders including sarcoidosis, granuloma annulare, necrobiosis lipoidica
Single case reports or small case series reporting response to JAK inhibitors include:
Chronic actinic dermatitis
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome (DRESS)
Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN)
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Hailey-Hailey disease.
Licensing history and developments
Tofacitinib received FDA approval for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 2012, and in 2017/18 also for psoriatic arthritis and ulcerative colitis. It is used off-label for psoriasis, and is currently under investigation for the treatment of several dermatological conditions including atopic dermatitis and vitiligo.
Ruxolitinib was approved by the TGA in Australia in 2013 for the treatment of myelofibrosis. It also became FDA-approved for the topical treatment of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis (2021), and non-segmental vitiligo in adult and paediatric patients 12 years of age and older (2022).
Baricitinib was TGA-approved in Australia in 2018 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and, in 2021, for moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. Approval for this indication has also been granted by the European Union and Japan.
Upadacitinib was approved by Medsafe New Zealand (2021) and by the FDA (2022) for the treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. Oral abrocitinib and upadacitinib received licensing for use in atopic eczema in the USA and Europe in 2023.
In 2020, delgocitinib cream was approved in Japan for the treatment of atopic dermatitis in adults. In 2024, it received European approval for the treatment of moderate-to-severe chronic hand dermatitis, followed by FDA approval in 2025.
What are the contraindications and precautions with Janus kinase inhibitors?
Active serious infections, including active tuberculosis
Hypersensitivity to the drug or any of the product excipients
Lymphopenia, neutropenia, or anaemia: absolute lymphocyte count <0.5 × 109/L; absolute neutrophil count <1 × 109/L; haemoglobin concentration <80 g/L
Concurrent biologic agents (eg, adalimumab, etanercept, rituximab) or other potent immunosuppressant agent (eg, azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus) — lack of safety data
Severe liver impairment (Child-Pugh class C) — lack of safety data
End stage renal impairment (eGFR <15 mL/min/1.73m2) — lack of safety data
Lactation — lack of safety data
Pregnancy — there is an increased risk of adverse fetal outcomes (eg, stillbirth, spontaneous abortion, ectopic pregnancy) in mothers exposed to oral JAKis compared to biologics. Pregnancy prevention is advised for females of childbearing potential.
Current (or history of) malignancies
Risk factors for arterial or venous thromboembolic events
Renal impairment — dose adjustments may be required if moderate (eGFR 30-59 mL/min/1.73m2) or severe (eGFR 15-30 mL/min/1.73m2); see individual drug pages.
The Janus kinase family consists of four intracellular tyrosine kinases — JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2). The JAKs are associated with transmembrane cytokine receptors and are activated by the binding of cytokines and growth factors.
When activated, JAKs phosphorylate the transmembrane cytokine receptor, leading to the activation of intracytoplasmic STATs. STATs then translocate to the nucleus and modulate gene transcription. The phosphate is provided by ATP, and each JAK and tyrosine kinase recognises a slightly different ATP-binding pocket. Overexpression of the JAK/STAT pathways can result in the development of autoimmune disease and malignancies.
JAK inhibitors (JAKis) can be classified according to their selectivity for specific JAK isoforms:
Pan-JAKi — delgocitinib, peficitinib
JAK1i — abrocitinib, itacitinib, oclacitinib, upadacitinib
JAK1/2i — baricitinib, ruxolitinib
JAK1/3i — tofacitinib
JAK3i — decernotinib, ritlecitinib
TYK2 inhibitors — brepocitinib, deucravacitinib.
The availability of different JAK inhibitors varies across countries and regions.
Janus kinase inhibitor signalling pathways
Image from: Singh R, Heron CE, Ghamrawi RI, Strowd LC, Feldman SR. Emerging role of Janus kinase inhibitors for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Immunotargets Ther. 2020;9:255-72. doi:10.2147/ITT.S229667
What are the benefits of Janus kinase inhibitors?
As Janus kinase inhibitors are small molecules, they can be used topically or orally, unlike biologic agents which require administration by injection. They are also significantly cheaper than biologics, which require complex biomanufacturing, as JAK inhibitors are chemically synthesised.
Based on head-to-head comparisons and meta-analyses, JAK inhibitors appear to demonstrate a faster onset of action than biologics in the treatment of atopic dermatitis.
What are the disadvantages of Janus kinase inhibitors?
Janus kinase inhibitors may interrupt the signal transduction of multiple cytokine receptors rather than target specific cytokines or cytokine receptors, leading to greater adverse effects.
For a number of dermatological conditions, clinical trials have shown rapid relapse is common after discontinuation of the JAK inhibitor such as alopecia areata, vitiligo, and psoriasis.
What are the side effects and risks of Janus kinase inhibitors?
Common adverse side effects of JAK inhibitors include:
Infection eg, upper respiratory tract infection, herpes zoster
Nausea and diarrhoea
Urticaria and angioedema.
Janus kinase inhibitors increase susceptibility to serious bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and viral infections due to immune modulation. Screening for tuberculosis, hepatitis B and C, and HIV should therefore be undertaken before starting treatment with a JAK inhibitor.
Herpes virus reactivation appears to be common; patients should receive zoster vaccination (recombinant zoster vaccine) before initiating JAKi therapy. Antiviral prophylaxis may be considered for patients with recurrent herpes flares.
Vaccination recommendations:
Update vaccinations prior to JAKi therapy, including pneumococcal (inactive) and annual influenza vaccines.
Avoid live vaccinations during or just before treatment eg, measles-mumps-rubella (MMR), typhoid, bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG), yellow fever, varicella zoster, rotavirus, and Japanese encephalitis.
See: Immunisation in immunosuppressed dermatology patients.
If signs or symptoms of serious infection develop during treatment with JAKis, treatment should be stopped until the infection is controlled.
JAKis are associated with increases in lipid parameters (total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides) during the first 12 weeks of treatment; lipid levels tend to stabilise thereafter. Dyslipidaemia should be managed according to clinical guidelines.
Major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs)
There are inconsistently reported associations between JAKis and an increased risk of MACEs (composite of non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal ischemic stroke, and cardiovascular death).
Tofacitinib was associated with a higher risk of MACEs compared to tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors in the treatment of patients aged ≥50 years with rheumatoid arthritis. However, this increased risk was primarily observed in patients aged ≥65 years and those with pre-existing risk factors eg, atherosclerotic disease, long-time smoking.
Although similar adverse events have not yet been reported with baricitinib and upadacitinib, the FDA found the risks have not been adequately evaluated and issued a black box warning due to the similar mechanisms of action.
An association between JAKis and malignancy (eg, T-cell lymphoma) is currently under investigation, with results to date being mixed.
For example, a 2023 meta-analysis found an increase in malignancy risk for JAKis compared to tumour necrosis factor inhibitors, but not when compared to placebo or methotrexate.
Tofacitinib was found to be associated with an increased incidence of malignancy compared to TNF inhibitors for rheumatoid arthritis patients aged ≥50 years with at least one cardiovascular risk factor. The TGA in Australia warns high dose (10mg bd) should be used with caution in patients with non-melanoma skin cancer.
Thromboembolic events
Certain JAKis may be associated with an increased risk of arterial and venous thromboembolism (VTE), particularly tofacitinib and baricitinib.
Haematologic effects
JAKis have been associated with lymphopenia, neutropenia, and anaemia. These effects may be more common in non-selective JAKis.
Treatment should be interrupted if patients develop an absolute lymphocyte count <0.5 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count <1 × 109/L, or haemoglobin concentration <80 g/L. Treatment may be restarted once levels return above these thresholds.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Challoumas D, Simpson C, Arnold M, et al. Janus-kinase inhibitor use in immune-mediated inflammatory diseases beyond licensed indications: A scoping review. Autoimmun Rev. 2025;24(3):103736. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103736. Journal
Chapman S, Kwa M, Gold LS, Lim HW. Janus kinase inhibitors in dermatology: Part I. A comprehensive review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;S0190-9622(21)02071–5. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2021.07.002. Journal
Chapman S, Gold LS, Lim HW. Janus kinase inhibitors in dermatology: Part II. A comprehensive review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;S0190-9622(21)02022-3. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2021.06.873. Journal
Dillon KL. A comprehensive literature review of JAK inhibitors in treatment of alopecia areata. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2021;14:691–714. doi:10.2147/CCID.S309215. Journal
Dulai AS, Tripathy K, Murase EM, et al. Maternal Janus kinase inhibitor use is associated with increased risk of aborted pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Dermatology. 2025;193(1):187-189. doi:10.1093/bjd/ljaf113. Journal
Jo CE, Gooderham M, Beecker J. TYK 2 inhibitors for the treatment of dermatologic conditions: the evolution of JAK inhibitors. Int J Dermatol. 2021;10.1111/ijd.15605. doi:10.1111/ijd.15605. Journal
Krueger JG, McInnes IB, Blauvelt A. Tyrosine kinase 2 and Janus kinase‒signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling and inhibition in plaque psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;S0190-9622(21)02017-X. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2021.06.869. Journal
Lin CM, Cooles FA, Isaacs JD. Basic mechanisms of JAK inhibition. Mediterr J Rheumatol. 2020;31(Suppl 1):100–4. doi:10.31138/mjr.31.1.100. Journal
Mendes-Bastos P, Ladizinski B, Guttman-Yassky E, et al. Characterization of acne associated with upadacitinib treatment in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: A post hoc integrated analysis of 3 phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;87(4):784-791. Journal
Singh R, Heron CE, Ghamrawi RI, Strowd LC, Feldman SR. Emerging role of Janus kinase inhibitors for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Immunotargets Ther. 2020;9:255-72. doi:10.2147/ITT.S229667. Journal
Worm M, Bauer A, Elsner P, Mahler V, Molin S, Nielsen TSS. Efficacy and safety of topical delgocitinib in patients with chronic hand eczema: data from a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled phase IIa study. Br J Dermatol. 2020;182(5):1103–10. doi:10.1111/bjd.18469. Journal
Treatment of atopic dermatitis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Jessner Lymphocytic Infiltrate]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/jessner-lymphocytic-infiltrate]
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate of the skin
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate — extra information
Benign lymphocytic infiltration, Jessner disease, Jessner Kanof syndrome, Benign chronic T cell infiltrative disorder, Benign lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Hon A Prof Amanda Oakley, September 2015.
What is Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate?
The condition is known by many other names including benign lymphocytic infiltration, Jessner disease, Jessner-Kanof syndrome, and benign chronic T-cell infiltrative disorder. It has been thought to be in the same disease spectrum as lupus erythematosus (lupus tumidus) but on histology, monoclonal antibody Leu 8 staining indicates they may be separate conditions.
What causes Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate?
What are the signs and symptoms of Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate?
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate plaques usually start off as defined, small, slightly raised red spots that gradually enlarge peripherally to create a well demarcated red plaque. Sometimes the centre of the lesion is left clear, ie forming an annular and arciform shape. Single or multiple lesions may occur and they range from 2 mm to 2 cm in diameter.
Seasonal activity of Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate is variable: more patients deteriorate in winter than summer and yet flares may be associated with sun exposure. Usually, they are symptomless but some patients may complain of itching or burning.
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate
How is the diagnosis of lymphocytic infiltrate made?
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds and skin biopsy.
The main differential diagnoses are tumid lupus erythematosus, lymphocytoma cutis, and polymorphous light eruption.
What treatment is available for Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate?
Usually, no treatment is necessary for Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate.
Cosmetic camouflage may be used to hide lesions and improve appearance.
There is a variable response to the following treatments:
Topical and intralesional corticosteroids
Antimalarial medications, such as hydroxychloroquine
UVA1 phototherapy or photochemotherapy (PUVA)
Photodynamic therapy
All patients should be advised to follow sun protection measures, regardless of their history of photo-aggravation.
What is the outlook for Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate?
After persisting for several months or years, lesions disappear spontaneously without leaving scars or causing other problems. Occasionally they may recur at the same site or elsewhere.
Book: Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Sixth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Duloxetine-induced Pseudolymphoma with Features of Lymphocytic Infiltration of Jessner-Kanof. Monica Corazza, Alessandro Borghi, Sara Minghetti, Lucia Mantovani, Roberta Gafà, Annarosa Virgili. DOI: 10.2340/00015555-1785 Journal
Guarneri C, Lentini M, Polimeni G, Giuffrida R, Cannavò SP. Ustekinumab-induced drug eruption resembling lymphocytic infiltration (of Jessner-Kanof) and lupus erythematosus tumidus. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;81(4):792–4. doi:10.1111/bcp.12837. PMC
Polymorphous light eruption
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Antimalarial medications in dermatology
Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate of the skin – Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Jewellery Allergy]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/jewellery-allergy]
Jewelry allergy. Jewellery allergy
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Jewellery allergy — extra information
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2012.
What is a jewellery allergy?
Infected earring reaction
What other reactions to jewellery occur?
Jewellery reactions are not always due to an allergy to a specific metal. Other reasons for a rash on the site of a particular item of jewellery may include:
Psoriasis and vitiligo can koebnerise and arise at a site or injury; for example, they could arise at the site of a tight watch strap, necklace or bangle
A piercing site may be infected with Staphylococcus aureus, resulting in oozing and crusting (impetigo or wound infection).
Unrelated rashes should also be considered if patch tests prove negative.
How do I know if my jewellery contains nickel?
By looking at a piece of jewellery, it is very difficult to determine whether or not it contains nickel. One should assume that all metal jewellery has some amount of nickel in it unless it made of stainless (surgical) steel, is either 18- or 24-carat gold, is sterling silver, or pure platinum.
Gold for jewellery is typically measured in karats (also spelt carats).
24 karat (pure gold) contains 99.9% gold (plus 0.1% other metal).
18 karat is 75% gold.
12 karat is 50% gold.
Nine karat is 37.5% gold.
Who is affected by jewellery allergy?
Nickel allergy is more common in women, probably because they are more likely to wear jewellery than men, although this is changing. While nickel allergy is the most common jewellery allergy to occur, allergy to other metals used in jewellery is possible. However, it appears to be rare.
What is the treatment of jewellery allergy?
Treatment of jewellery allergy requires removing responsible jewellery.
How to avoid jewellery allergy
Alternative white gold alloys are available based on palladium, silver and other white metals, but the palladium alloys are more expensive than those using nickel. High-karat white gold alloys are far more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver or sterling silver.
When having ears or other body parts pierced, have it done with a stainless steel needle and make sure your jewellery is made of stainless steel or either 18- or 24 karat gold.
Look for jewellery that is hypoallergenic, i.e. made of stainless steel, at least 18-karat gold, sterling silver, or polycarbonate plastic.
If you must wear earrings that contain nickel, add plastic covers made specifically for earring studs.
Test your metal items
Test your metal items to see if they contain nickel or cobalt. Obtain a testing kit from your dermatologist, pharmacist, or online.
Your dermatologist may have further specific advice, particularly if you are highly sensitive to nickel or other metals.
Nickel (Jewelry) Allergy — Web MD
Allerderm – for a Nickel Detection Kit
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Job Syndrome]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/job-syndrome]
Job syndrome (hyper-IgE syndrome)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Job syndrome — extra information
Hyper-IgE syndrome, Hyper IgE syndrome, Recurring cold staphylococcal abscesses, Quie-Hill syndrome, Buckley syndrome, Job Buckley syndrome, Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome, HIE syndrome
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2004.
What is Job syndrome?
Job syndrome, also called hyper-IgE syndrome, is the name given to a rare inherited immune deficiency characterised by severe infections of the skin and other organs.
Job syndrome: eczema
Job syndrome Job syndrome
What are the clinical features of Job syndrome?
Clinical features of Job syndrome include:
Variable severity in affected family members
Rash similar to atopic dermatitis (eczema)
The rash is often present at birth or within the first few weeks, unlike atopic dermatitis (which appears after 3 months of age)
Secondary infection with Staphylococcus aureus resulting in crusted dermatitis, folliculitis and abscesses
Episodes of bronchitis and pneumonia
Other sites may also become infected including sinuses, ears, teeth and gums
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Pitted scarring of the face
Bony abnormalites including fractures and scoliosis (twisted spine)
Dental abnormalities such as double rows of teeth
Unusual facial appearance
Very high levels of the ‘allergy’ immunoglobulin IgE in the blood
High levels of eosinophils in the blood.
What is the cause of Job syndrome?
The cause of Job syndrome is unknown but it is thought to be a specific genetic abnormality affecting chromosome 4q. The result is a defective immune response involving T lymphocytes, neutrophils and the cytokines they produce, especially interferon-gamma. Excessive levels of interferon-gamma result in marked elevation of immunoglobulin E.
What is the treatment for Job syndrome?
There is no known cure for Job syndrome. Antibiotics are used to control bacterial infections, often requiring a longer course of treatment than is usually necessary. Several doctors from different specialties may need to help care for affected children.
OMIM – Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (search term Job syndrome (hyper-IgE syndrome))
Dermatologic Manifestations of Job Syndrome — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Dermatomyositis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-dermatomyositis]
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Juvenile dermatomyositis — extra information
Juvenile dermatopolymyositis, Childhood type dermatomyositis
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory, Rashes
M33.0, L94.4, L94.2, E83.59, E88.1
4A41.01, 5C64.5, EF01.Z
1212005, 838312001, 247455006, 85905009, 6595006, 21323007, 71325002,
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Author: Dr Hellen Geros, Hospital Medical Officer (PGY2), Western Health, Melbourne, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. November 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is juvenile dermatomyositis?
Juvenile dermatomyositis is the most common form of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy affecting children and adolescents under the age of 18 years.
Who gets juvenile dermatomyositis?
Juvenile dermatomyositis can affect all races and both sexes, although there is a marked female predominance of 5:1. Unlike adult-onset dermatomyositis, there does not appear to be any racial predilection. The peak age of onset is 5–10 years (median 7.4 years). One-quarter of patients present before the age of 4 years. It affects 2–4 children per million per year.
What causes juvenile dermatomyositis?
Juvenile dermatomyositis is a small-vessel autoimmune vasculopathy in which the immune system attacks blood vessels leading to muscle inflammation. The exact pathogenesis remains unclear; however, the following factors may have a role:
Genetic susceptibility
Environmental factors, such as tobacco smoke and air pollution
Infectious triggers, such as viral infections.
There are very few case reports of drug-induced dermatomyositis in children. Malignancy is not associated with juvenile dermatomyositis, unlike adult-onset disease.
What are the clinical features of juvenile dermatomyositis?
The clinical features of juvenile dermatomyositis are similar to those of adult-onset dermatomyositis, with skin changes often preceding the muscle weakness.
Cutaneous features of juvenile dermatomyositis
Heliotrope rash — lilac discolouration around the eyes
Gottron papules and/or Gottron sign — purple papules and plaques over the small joints in the hands, elbows, and knees
Shawl and/or V sign, and other photosensitive rashes such as malar erythema
Dilated or tortuous capillaries in the proximal nailfolds best seen on dermoscopy
Skin ulceration affects 20% due to vasculopathy in the skin.
Cutaneous signs of juvenile dermatomyositis
Heliotrope rash of eyelids Gottron papules over joints Nailfold changes
Myositis of juvenile dermatomyositis
Symmetrical proximal muscle weakness (thighs, upper arms)
Gowers sign describes the use of hands and arms to ‘walk’ up the legs in getting up from a squatting position
Dysphagia and voice hoarseness
Muscle tenderness, aching, or pain.
What are the complications of juvenile dermatomyositis?
Calcinosis is more common in children with dermatomyositis than in adults, affecting up to 40%. It is a dystrophic calcification in muscle, fascia, subcutaneous tissue, or skin presenting 1–3 years after disease onset. Calcinosis cutis over the elbows, knees, trunk, hands, feet, buttocks, and head presents as hard yellow or white nodules with subsequent ulceration. The development of calcinosis is associated with delayed diagnosis and treatment, and severe or prolonged disease activity.
Lipodystrophy may be localised, partial, or widespread, and affects 10% of juvenile dermatomyositis patients, particularly those with a chronic continuous course; lipodystrophy is rare in adult-onset dermatomyositis. The onset is often delayed; in one large study of 28 patients, lipodystrophy began 4.6 years after diagnosis of juvenile dermatomyositis. Joint contractures and calcinosis cutis were found to be strong predictors for the development of lipodystrophy. As the development of lipodystrophy is associated with diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridaemia, and non-alcoholic steatotic hepatitis, careful monitoring is required in these patients.
Arthritis, either primary joint disease or secondary to the muscle weakness, is common.
Interstitial lung disease, cardiac disease, and liver/bowel involvement are rare but serious complications of juvenile dermatomyositis.
How is juvenile dermatomyositis diagnosed?
Diagnosis of juvenile dermatomyositis is suspected clinically in a child presenting with the classic skin signs of heliotrope rash, Gottron papules/sign, and myositis (Bohan Peters diagnostic criteria).
Investigations, which may include some of the following, will confirm the diagnosis and assist in predicting prognosis.
Autoantibody screen: Anti-p155/140 and anti-MJ autoantibodies are more prevalent in children than adults with dermatomyositis. Anti-tRNA synthetase autoantibodies are uncommon in juvenile dermatomyositis in contrast to adult-onset disease.
Anti-p155/140 autoantibodies — photosensitive rashes, skin ulceration and oedema, generalised lipodystrophy, chronic course.
Anti-MJ autoantibodies — Caucasian children, young onset of disease, significant muscle effects with impaired physical function, frequent hospitalisation, severe disease less likely to achieve remission.
Anti-MDA5 autoantibodies — Asian children, aggressive lung disease, oral and cutaneous ulceration, arthritis, mild muscle disease.
Anti-Jo-1 autoantibodies — lung disease, arthritis, fevers, Raynaud phenomenon, mechanic’s hands.
Muscle investigations — muscle enzymes, muscle biopsy, MRI, electromyography.
What is the differential diagnosis for juvenile dermatomyositis?
Skin signs without myositis:
Juvenile-onset amyopathic dermatomyositis; defined as typical skin signs of dermatomyositis without muscle involvement for at least six months
Muscle weakness and/or myositis without skin changes:
Muscular dystrophies and other genetic muscle diseases
Rheumatological disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, scleroderma, and juvenile polymyositis.
What is the treatment for juvenile dermatomyositis?
The aim of treatment in juvenile dermatomyositis is to control disease activity and induce remission, prevent long term organ damage and deformity, and improve function and quality of life. It generally requires a multidisciplinary team including a general practitioner, physiotherapist, dermatologist, and paediatric rheumatologist.
Sun protection, including sun protective clothing and sunscreen use: ultraviolet radiation exposure can exacerbate cutaneous symptoms.
Adequate vitamin D and calcium levels
Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy
Initial treatment requires high dose systemic corticosteroids to rapidly reduce skin and muscle inflammation. The addition of steroid-sparing agents, such as methotrexate or ciclosporin, is more effective than prednisone alone, and allows the corticosteroid dose to be weaned quickly, minimising side effects associated with long term/high dose use. Rituximab has been reported to improve some cutaneous features and myositis in juvenile dermatomyositis; calcinosis, alopecia, poikiloderma, and lipodystrophy showed no major improvements in a large trial of 48 patients. No treatment has been found to consistently improve the calcinosis.
What is the outcome for juvenile dermatomyositis?
The prognosis for juvenile dermatomyositis has markedly improved since the early use of high dose steroids has become the standard of care.
The disease course in one-third is monocyclic (treatment ceased within 2 years with longterm remission), one-quarter is polycyclic (treatment required again after a remission), and the remainder follow a chronic course unable to cease treatment.
With adequate treatment some children lead normal lives with full recovery. However, a significant proportion have a prolonged course with residual muscle weakness and atrophy, joint contractures, and calcinosis. Irreversible muscle damage and calcinosis cutis can significantly impact physical function and quality of life, necessitating assistance with self-care or being unable to walk unassisted.
The mortality rate is 2–3%, with death due to pulmonary, gastrointestinal, cardiac, and multisystem failure.
Aggarwal R, Loganathan P, Koontz D, Qi Z, Reed AM, Oddis CV. Cutaneous improvement in refractory adult and juvenile dermatomyositis after treatment with rituximab. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017;56(2):247–54. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kew396. PubMed
Bingham A, Mamyrova G, Rother KI, et al. Predictors of acquired lipodystrophy in juvenile-onset dermatomyositis and a gradient of severity. Medicine (Baltimore). 2008;87(2):70–86. doi:10.1097/MD.0b013e31816bc604. PubMed Central
Hoeltzel MF, Oberle EJ, Robinson AB, Agarwal A, Rider LG. The presentation, assessment, pathogenesis, and treatment of calcinosis in juvenile dermatomyositis. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2014;16(12):467. doi:10.1007/s11926-014-0467-y. PubMed
Huber A, Feldman BM. Long-term outcomes in juvenile dermatomyositis: how did we get here and where are we going? Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2005;7(6):441–6. doi:10.1007/s11926-005-0048-1. PubMed
Lundberg IE, Tjärnlund A, Bottai M, et al. 2017 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for adult and juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and their major subgroups [published correction appears in Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Sep;77(9):e64]. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017;76(12):1955–64. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211468. PubMed
Orione MA, Silva CA, Sallum AM, et al. Risk factors for juvenile dermatomyositis: exposure to tobacco and air pollutants during pregnancy. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2014;66(10):1571–5. doi:10.1002/acr.22358. PubMed
Rider LG, Nistala K. The juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: pathogenesis, clinical and autoantibody phenotypes, and outcomes. J Intern Med. 2016;280(1):24–38. doi:10.1111/joim.12444. PubMed
Ruperto N, Pistorio A, Oliveira S, et al. Prednisone versus prednisone plus ciclosporin versus prednisone plus methotrexate in new-onset juvenile dermatomyositis: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10019):671–8. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01021-1. PubMed
Wu JQ, Lu MP, Reed AM. Juvenile dermatomyositis: advances in clinical presentation, myositis-specific antibodies and treatment. World J Pediatr. 2020;16(1):31–43. doi:10.1007/s12519-019-00313-8. PubMed
Adult-onset dermatomyositis
Drug-induced dermatomyositis
Juvenile Dermatomyositis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-idiopathic-arthritis]
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis — extra information
Systemic diseases, Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
M08, M08.80, M08.00, M08.0, M08.1, M08.2, M08.3, M08.4, M08.8, M08.9
FA24.Z, FA24.0Z, FA24.1, FA24.Y, FA24.2, FA24.4, EB10, EB2Y
410502007, 201796004, 16044751000119106, 410798004, 410801005, 410796000, 410797009, 239802003, 410794002, 271807003, 430478003, 402432002
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Authors: Nicole S Kim, Medical Student, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Dr Yuliya Velykoredko, Dermatology Resident, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. September 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) encompasses all chronic childhood arthropathies beginning before 16 years of age with persistent arthritis occuring for at least 6 weeks.
JIA is recognised as having seven major subtypes, some of which exhibit the clinical and pathological features of other autoimmune disorders; these subtypes include:
Systemic JIA (also known as juvenile-onset Still disease)
Rheumatic factor (RF)-positive polyarthritis
RF-negative polyarthritis
Enthesitis-related arthritis
Undifferentiated arthritis [1,2].
Arthritis Exanthem Exanthem
Who gets juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
JIA can occur in anyone from infants to adolescents, and has a mean onset age of 6 years of age. Most types of JIA affect boys and girls equally, although systemic-onset JIA (juvenile-onset Still disease) is predominantly seen in girls [3].
What causes juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
The exact cause of JIA is unclear, but a pronounced immune response in a perpetuating loop of both innate and adaptive immunity is believed to contribute to the pathogenesis of JIA. Aberrant activation of the innate immune system lead to the dysregulated production of proinflammatory cytokines. Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1, and IL-6 play a critical inciting role. The effects of these cytokines provide explanations for the various clinical features seen in systemic JIA. These effects include:
Bone marrow granulopoiesis (proliferation of granulocytes)
Increase in osteoclast activity (cells that absorb bone)
Hepatocyte stimulation
Activation of thermoregulatory functions (body temperature) [3,4].
The increased recruitment of inflammatory cells in the joint synovial membrane was demonstrated in several studies by a significant elevation of proinflammatory cytokines in the synovial fluid of affected children. Proinflammatory cytokines in the synovium lead to increased production and accumulation of synovial fluid and thickening of the synovial lining. This chronic synovial inflammation is apparent and common to all JIA subtypes. In addition, RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand) cytokine, which is associated with bone resorption (breakdown) and cartilage damage, was reported to be present in large amounts in the synovial membrane of children with JIA.
Some studies have consistently supported associations between enthesitis-related JIA and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) polymorphisms; there appear to be increased associations, especially with early-onset disease. A monogenic form of systemic JIA with an underlying mutation in a regulatory protein involved in macrophage metabolism has been described [2,3].
Environmental factors may contribute to the development of JIA. Some studies have suggested associations with exposure to antibiotics, a bacterial infection in immunosuppressed individuals, and maternal smoking during pregnancy [2,4].
What are the clinical features of juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
Cutaneous involvement is one of the key extra-articular factors in systemic JIA. The exanthem or rash presents as discrete, salmon-pink macules, or oedematous papules that are typically transient and coincide with fevers. These tend to occur on the trunk, axillae, and proximal extremities but are not commonly seen on the palms, soles, or the face. Persistent plaques, periorbital oedema, or erythema are less common but may be observed.
Although rashes in JIA are seldom pruritic, they can be elicited by cutaneous injury or scratching (Koebner phenomenon), in which case the lesions exhibit a linear appearance.
Children with JIA often present with limping and stiffness, without any known injury or prior infections. Common non-cutaneous manifestations include:
Joint pain and swelling
High spiking daily fever (quotidian pattern)
Hepatosplenomegaly [1–3].
What are the complications of juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
Musculoskeletal complications may occur secondary to ongoing inflammation and poor disease control, including:
A leg-length discrepancy
Sacroiliac joint and spine ankylosis (stiffening due to bone fusion).
Sometimes JIA may result in more severe complications with devastating outcomes. These may include:
Uveitis — this may lead to vision loss; screening and close monitoring by a paediatric ophthalmologist is warranted for severe, active uveitis
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) — this may be life-threatening; it is characterised by fever, cytopenias, liver dysfunction, coagulopathy, purpura, hypofibrinogenaemia (a blood clotting factor disorder), hypertriglyceridaemia (high levels of triglycerides in the blood), and a very high level of ferritin [2,3].
How is juvenile idiopathic arthritis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of systemic JIA is made clinically after exclusion of other entities, such as malignancies and infections that can also present with high fever and arthralgia. According to the International League of Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR) criteria for systemic JIA, arthritis must have persisted for at least 6 weeks and fever for 2 weeks, accompanied by one or more of the following:
Transient erythematous rash
Generalised lymphadenopathy
Serositis (inflammation of a serous membrane) [5].
When JIA is suspected, paediatric rheumatologists should be involved promptly to initiate the appropriate investigations and to minimise any delay in treatment. Further investigations including laboratory tests and imaging are helpful to confirm the diagnosis or to classify arthritis into a specific subtype. The test results can also be useful to guide treatment and to monitor the disease course.
The most relevant laboratory tests for JIA are:
A complete blood count — anaemia, thrombocytosis, and leucocytosis are often present in systemic JIA whereas they are not typically seen in oligoarticular JIA
Erythrocyte sediment rate (ESR) — this is significantly elevated in systemic JIA but may be normal or mild to moderately elevated in other subtypes
C-reactive protein (CRP) — this is elevated to varying degrees in the different subtypes of JIA
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) — this is often negative in systemic JIA but may be positive in oligoarticular and polyarticular forms of JIA
RF and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP); these are useful to identify RF-positive polyarthritis.
Pathology is not required for a definitive diagnosis of JIA, but the exanthem in systemic JIA characteristically exhibits a perivascular and interstitial neutrophil-dominant infiltrate; this can also be referred to as neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis, a common pattern in autoinflammatory processes [3].
What is the differential diagnosis for juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
Several conditions may present similarly to systemic-onset JIA, including having a transient exanthem, fever, and arthritis. These include:
Urticarial vasculitis
Serum sickness-like reaction
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Kawasaki disease [3].
What is the treatment for juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
Treatment of systemic JIA is directed at symptom management, improving or managing joint function, and minimising complications. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are typically the first-line agents for mild articular or extra-articular presentations to control pain. Other pharmacological agents include:
Oral corticosteroids for moderate to severe disease.
Intravenous corticosteroids — these may be required in patients with severe flare-up or complications, such as MAS.
Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), such as methotrexate, ciclosporin, and leflunomide.
Drugs that block inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1, have proven efficacy, especially in longstanding JIA. These include:
Anakinra — an IL-1 receptor antagonist
Canakinumab — a humanised monoclonal antibody directed against IL-1
Tocilizumab — this humanoid monoclonal antibody blocks IL-6 [2–4].
What is the outcome for juvenile idiopathic arthritis?
The disease course of systemic JIA is variable. Reports have indicated that 40–60% of patients reach the remission of arthralgia. Systemic manifestations may remain active and may persist after years. A better prognosis is associated with the early treatment of active disease [2,3].
Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, Gilchrest BA, Paller AS, Leffell DJ, Wolff K. Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in general medicine, 8th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Clinch J, Shah R. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis. BMJ Best Practice November 2017. Available at: (accessed September 2018).
Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L. Dermatology, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018.
Prakken B, Albani S, Martini A. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Lancet 2011; 377: 2138–49. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60244-4. PubMed
Petty RE, Southwood TR, Manners P, et al; International League of Associations for Rheumatology. International League of Associations for Rheumatology classification of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: second revision, Edmonton, 2001. J Rheumatol 2004; 31: 390–2. PubMed
Rheumatoid arthritis
Adult-onset Still disease
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis — Arthritis Foundation
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis — Arthritis New Zealand (PDF)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Plantar Dermatosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-plantar-dermatosis]
Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Juvenile plantar dermatosis — extra information
Peridigital dermatosis, Atopic winter feet, Forefoot dermatitis, Dermatitis plantaris sicca, Moon-boot foot syndrome, Sweaty sock dermatitis, Forefoot eczema
Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Author: Original page by Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Anita Eshraghi, Dermatologist, Sweden, and Dr Oakley, in March 2018. Revised September 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis is a common and chronic, dry-skin condition of the feet that mainly affects pre-adolescent children.
Juvenile plantar dermatosis is also known as atopic winter feet and forefoot dermatitis.
Juvenile plantar dermatosis Juvenile plantar dermatosis Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Who gets juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis commonly affects children between the age of 3 and 14 years, with an average age of 8. It occurs slightly more frequent in boys than girls. Juvenile plantar dermatosis is rarely seen in adults.
Although an association has been suggested with atopic dermatitis, asthma, or hay fever, this has not been confirmed in case control studies.
What causes juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis may be caused by:
Repetitive frictional movements, as the foot moves up and down in a shoe
The occlusive effect of covered footwear, especially synthetic shoes (eg, nylon or vinyl)
Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), which when followed by rapid drying leads to cracking and fissuring
Genetic sensitivity of the skin
Climatic changes: with worsening during the summer months due to heat and sweating, and in colder months due to the wearing of winter boots. Hence there is no consistent seasonal variation.
What are the clinical features of juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis involves the weight-bearing areas of the soles of the feet presenting as itchy or sore, shiny, red skin with a glazed appearance and loss of the epidermal ridge pattern.
It usually affects both feet symmetrically.
Painful fissures, cracking, and scaling occur.
The plantar aspect of the great toes (ball of the big toes) is the commonest site of involvement and is the usual initial site.
It can rarely affect the palms and fingertips.
What are the complications of juvenile plantar dermatosis?
The most common complication of juvenile plantar dermatosis is painful cracks and fissures. These may take many weeks or months to heal.
Secondary bacterial skin infection is rare.
How is juvenile plantar dermatosis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of juvenile plantar dermatosis is based on the clinical findings.
Skin biopsy is rarely required. Histology shows epidermal spongiosis and dermal inflammation centred around the sweat ducts.
What is the differential diagnosis for juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis is sometimes difficult to distinguish from:
Keratolysis exfoliativa (focal peeling)
What is the treatment for juvenile plantar dermatosis?
There is no consistently useful treatment. General recommendations include the following without supporting studies to show benefit.
Wear well fitting shoes, preferably leather, to minimise friction.
Wearing two or more pairs of cotton or woollen socks can also help reduce friction.
Avoid wearing shoes and socks made of synthetic materials.
Change socks regularly.
Lubricate the dry skin
Apply moisturising cream containing urea or petrolatum, after bath and before bed.
Barrier cream (containing dimeticone) are easier to wear during the day and should be applied every 4 hours.
Schedule quiet times with little or no walking to allow fissures to heal.
Fissures heal faster when occluded. Adhesive plasters are usually satisfactory.
Spray or liquid acrylate glue can be applied to the fissures to relieve pain.
Prescription ointments
When applied once or twice daily for courses of up to 4 weeks, these rarely prove more effective than simple emollients.
What is the outcome for juvenile plantar dermatosis?
Juvenile plantar dermatosis usually clears spontaneously in adolescence, but can persist into adult life.
Ashton RE, Griffiths WA. Juvenile plantar dermatosis--atopy or footwear?. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1986;11(6):529–34. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2230.1986.tb00504.x. PubMed
Ashton RE, Jones RR, Griffiths A. Juvenile plantar dermatosis. A clinicopathologic study. Arch Dermatol. 1985;121(2):225–8. PubMed
Harding CR. The stratum corneum: structure and function in health and disease. Dermatol Ther. 2004;17 Suppl 1:6–15. doi:10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04s1001.x. PubMed
Shipley DR, Kennedy CT. Juvenile plantar dermatosis responding to topical tacrolimus ointment. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2006;31(3):453–4. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2230.2006.02121.x. PubMed
Elias PM, Choi EH. Interactions among stratum corneum defensive functions. Exp Dermatol. 2005;14(10):719–26. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2005.00363.x. PubMed
Ingram JR. Eczematous disorders. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 39.21-2.
Foot skin conditions
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Spring Eruption]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-spring-eruption]
Juvenile spring eruption
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile spring eruption
Juvenile spring eruption — extra information
Juvenile spring eruption
Author: Dr Mark Duffill, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2008.
What is juvenile spring eruption?
Juvenile spring eruption is a distinct sun-induced skin condition appearing on the light-exposed skin of the ears, usually in boys and young men in early spring.
What are the clinical features of juvenile spring eruption?
Juvenile spring eruption Juvenile spring eruption Juvenile spring eruption
What is the cause of juvenile spring eruption?
Juvenile spring eruption is probably a localised form of polymorphic light eruption (PMLE) — a sun allergy rash of unknown cause which can have various appearances and affects more widespread areas of sun-exposed skin. Some patients with juvenile spring eruption also have PMLE. Cold weather, such as can occur in the spring, is also thought to play a part in juvenile spring eruption.
How is juvenile spring eruption diagnosed?
Juvenile spring eruption is usually diagnosed clinically and tests are not necessary.
What is the treatment of juvenile spring eruption?
The lesions of juvenile spring eruption are treated with potent topical steroids and emollients. Antihistamines may be prescribed for the itch. The ears should be protected from sun exposure.
To prevent recurrences of juvenile spring eruption, especially when climatic conditions are conducive, hats and sunscreens should be used. Hair can be grown over the ears.
Polymorphic light eruption
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Xanthogranuloma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-xanthogranuloma]
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Juvenile xanthogranuloma — extra information
Naevoxanthoendothelioma, Xanthoma multiplex, Juvenile xanthoma, Congenital xanthoma tuberosum, Juvenile giant cell granuloma, Xanthoma naeviforme, JXG
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Authors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand; Dr Amy Stanway, Dermatology Registrar, Nottingham, UK. Revised: Dr David Lim, Dermatology Registrar, Auckland, New Zealand. August 2011. Updated: Dr Richa Tripathi, Consultant Dermatologist, Grande International Hospital, Kathmandu, Nepal. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Juvenile xanthogranuloma is a type of non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis usually limited to the skin in very young children.
Who gets juvenile xanthogranuloma?
The incidence of juvenile xanthogranuloma is estimated to be 1 per million in children, however it is probably underdiagnosed.
Up to 10% of patients with neurofibromatosis type I may develop JXG. There have been many single case reports of JXG occurring in association with other conditions.
What causes juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Juvenile xanthogranuloma is a polyclonal proliferation of cholesterol-containing factor XIIIa-positive histiocytes, the cause of which is unknown. Theories include:
Nonspecific response to injury or viral infection
Somatic gene mutations
Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK).
What are the clinical features of juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Solitary asymptomatic skin lesion (80%)
Multiple lesions and systemic involvement can occur
Commonest site — head and neck
Rare mucocutaneous sites include hands and feet, anogenital, oral cavity, and under the nails
Eye is the most common extracutaneous site (0.5%); unilateral involvement of the iris; typically presents as a red eye, sometimes without skin involvement
Papules and nodules, 1–10 mm in diameter, smooth and firm; large lesions can ulcerate
Lesion colour progresses from red through yellow to brown before fading
Atypical forms – include giant, generalised, clustered, subcutaneous
Dermoscopy of juvenile xanthogranuloma
Central yellow-orange
Branched linear vessels
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Juvenile xanthogranuloma is probably underdiagnosed in dark skin as erythema can be difficult to appreciate and the asymptomatic nature and self-limiting course mean a solitary lesion may not be noticed.
What are the complications of juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Ulceration and atrophic scarring, particularly of a congenital lesion
Ocular lesions can lead to hyphema, glaucoma, and/or loss of vision
Systemic involvement including liver and bone – often, but not always, associated with multiple skin lesions
Multiorgan involvement can be fatal (rare)
How is juvenile xanthogranuloma diagnosed?
Juvenile xanthogranuloma is rarely a clinical diagnosis, although dermoscopy is characteristic. Confirmation may require biopsy [see Juvenile xanthogranuloma pathology].
Patients with more than two skin lesions, early onset lesions, and/or a unilateral red eye or ocular symptoms should be referred for an eye examination.
Following a full skin examination, a typical solitary lesion may be investigated only if clinically indicated. If two or more skin lesions are identified investigations should be directed by clinical symptoms and signs, and may include:
Blood tests — full blood count (bone marrow biopsy if cytopenic), liver and kidney function tests
Ultrasound — of abdomen and lymph nodes
Radiology — X-rays, brain MRI, and/or CT scan.
What is the differential diagnosis for juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Solitary lesion — mastocytoma, benign cephalic histiocytosis, necrobiotic xanthogranuloma
Multiple lesions — molluscum contagiosum, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, multicentric reticulohistiocytosis
What is the treatment for juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Observation if asymptomatic
Simple excision if causing functional impairment or psychosocial effects
Eye involvement — topical or intralesional steroids
Chemotherapy for organ dysfunction
What is the outcome for juvenile xanthogranuloma?
Hernández-San Martín MJ, Vargas-Mora P, Aranibar L. Juvenile xanthogranuloma: an entity with a wide clinical spectrum. Actas Dermosifiliogr (Engl Ed). 2020;111(9):725–33. doi:10.1016/j.ad.2020.07.004. Journal
Höck M, Zelger B, Schweigmann G, et al. The various clinical spectra of juvenile xanthogranuloma: imaging for two case reports and review of the literature. BMC Pediatr. 2019;19(1):128. doi:10.1186/s12887-019-1490-y. Journal
Oza VS, Stringer T, Campbell C, et al. Congenital-type juvenile xanthogranuloma: a case series and literature review. Pediatr Dermatol. 2018;35(5):582–7. doi:10.1111/pde.13544. PubMed
So N, Liu R, Hogeling M. Juvenile xanthogranulomas: examining single, multiple, and extracutaneous presentations. Pediatr Dermatol. 2020;37(4):637–44. doi:10.1111/pde.14174. PubMed
Xu J, Ma L. Dermoscopic patterns in juvenile xanthogranuloma based on the histological classification. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021;7:618946. doi:10.3389/fmed.2020.618946. Journal
Intralymphatic histiocytosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Malignant histiocytosis
Reticulohistiocytosis
Dermatologic manifestations of juvenile xanthogranuloma — Medscape
Juvenile xanthogranuloma — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Juvenile Xanthogranuloma Pathology]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/juvenile-xanthogranuloma-pathology]
Juvenile xanthogranuloma pathology
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Juvenile xanthogranuloma pathology
Juvenile xanthogranuloma pathology — extra information
Genetic, Diagnosis and testing
Diagnosis and testing
Juvenile xanthogranuloma pathology
Author: Adjunct A/Prof Patrick Emanuel, Dermatopathologist, Clinica Ricardo Palma, Lima, Peru. DermNet Editor-in-Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. September 2018.
Differential diagnoses
Juvenile xanthogranuloma usually presents in young children as a smooth pink or yellow nodule.
Histology of juvenile xanthogranuloma
In juvenile xanthogranuloma, the lesion begins as a dense lymphohistiocytic proliferation of dermis with rare giant cells. As it evolves, the dermal tumour contains a population of foamy histiocytes and giant cells (figures 1–3). Touton giant cells are quite characteristic of juvenile xanthogranuloma (best seen in figure 3). These cells contain a ring of nuclei surrounding a central homogeneous cytoplasm, while foamy cytoplasm surrounds the nuclei. Later the cells become more spindled and fibrohistiocytic-like.
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3
Special studies for juvenile xanthogranuloma
Immunohistochemistry can be used. Typically the tumour is positive with CD68, alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, lysozyme, vimentin, and Factor XIIIa. Useful negative stains include S100 and CD1a.
Differential diagnosis for juvenile xanthogranuloma
Dermatofibroma typically lacks Touton giant cells and has a dense collagenous stroma, storiform growth pattern, and often an overlying pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia.
Xanthomas show more uniform foamy histiocytes and more frequently occur in multiplicity. the polymorphous infiltrate typically seen in juvenile xanthogranuloma is usually absent.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis typically shows staining with S100+ and CD1a+.
Reticulohistiocytoma is composed of histiocytes with eosinophilic or ground glass cytoplasm.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis — PathologyOutlines.com
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Dermatopathology index
Juvenile xanthogranuloma — PathologyOutlines.com
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Kaposi Sarcoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/kaposi-sarcoma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Kaposi sarcoma — extra information
KS, Classic Kaposi sarcoma, Endemic Kaposi sarcoma, African Kaposi sarcoma, HIV-associated Kaposi sarcoma, Iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma
C46, C46.0, C46.2, C46.7, B20
2B57.Z, 1C62.3, 2B57.1, 2B57.Y
109385007, 109386005, 109388009, 703625002, 403979000, 403978008, 420524008
Author: Dr Jane Morgan, sexual health physician, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2003. Editor-in-Chief: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated by Jannet Gomez; Dr Amanda Oakley, February 2017. Copy editor: Gus Mitchell. Minor update November 2025.
What is Kaposi sarcoma?
Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is a disease of the endothelial cells of blood vessels and the lymphatic system. Despite its name, it is no longer classified as a sarcoma (which is a malignant tumour of mesenchymal origin) as it is due to multicentric vascular hyperplasia.
There are four types of Kaposi sarcoma.
Classic type of Kaposi sarcoma — this affects older men of Mediterranean and Middle European descent and in men in Sub-Saharan Africa. It is associated with diabetes mellitus, but is not associated with HIV infection.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated Kaposi sarcoma — this mainly affects men who have sex with men (MSM). Kaposi sarcoma is one of the most common forms of cancer in Uganda and Zambia, especially in children.
Endemic or African Kaposi sarcoma — this arises in some parts of Africa in children and young adults.
Iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma — as a result of drug treatment causing immune suppression.
In the United States, Kaposi sarcoma was particularly common in the 1980s. It remains prevalent amongst HIV-positive men who have had sex with men (MSM), in which it has a very aggressive course. It occurs less frequently in intravenous drug users and is rare in women, haemophiliacs, or their sexual partners. HIV–associated Kaposi sarcoma is more common in women than in men in some parts of Africa. It has become less common in the US and Europe because of effective highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) for HIV.
Iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma is a particular concern for organ transplant patients, especially in geographic areas associated with high levels of infection with Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV). Most have the virus before transplantation, but the drugs cause it to reactivate. Use of corticosteroids and biologics like rituximab, infliximab, and abatacept, prescribed for chronic inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, are also prone to develop Kaposi sarcoma.
What is the cause of Kaposi sarcoma?
Kaposi sarcoma has several causes.
Infection with Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV). This virus is also called human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8). It is most often found in MSM but has been seen in heterosexuals. Data is emerging that non-sexual modes of transmission can occur, possibly via saliva or arthropod bites.
It is also associated with the production of specific cytokines or cell signalling proteins, genetic factors, hormonal factors and immunodeficiency. Decreasing CD4 cell count has a strong association with AIDS-associated and classic Kaposi sarcoma.
KSHV may lie dormant, or replicate and cause disease. KSHV may also cause some forms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma and Castleman disease.
How does Kaposi sarcoma present?
Kaposi sarcoma presents as red to purplish macules, papules and nodules anywhere on the skin or mucous membranes lining the mouth, nose, and throat; lymph nodes; or other organs. Initially, the lesions are small and painless, but they can ulcerate and become painful.
There are various forms:
Localised nodular KS
Locally aggressive KS
Generalised lymphadenopathic KS
Localised plaques of KS
Infiltrative plaques of KS
Disseminated cutaneous and visceral KS
Lymphangioma-like/cavernous KS.
Kaposi sarcoma often starts as flat patches on one or both lower legs, often in association with lymphoedema. The patches evolve into plaques, nodules or scaly tumours.
Kaposi sarcoma in association with HIV infection may develop at any time during the illness. Generally, the greater the immunosuppression (eg, with CD4 cell counts less than 200/mm3), the more extensive and aggressive the Kaposi sarcoma will be.
Kaposi sarcoma lesions can also occur internally; in the gut, lungs, genitals, lymphatic system and elsewhere. These internal lesions may cause symptoms such as:
Discomfort with swallowing
Patch stage KS Plaque stage KS Classic KS Palatal KS Plaque stage KS Tumour stage KS
How is Kaposi sarcoma diagnosed?
Blood tests may show no abnormality, depending on whether there are associated disorders such as AIDS. Anaemia may arise if there is bleeding. KSHV assays or antibody titres to KSHV are challenging to interpret. CD4 lymphocyte counts and plasma HIV load studies are performed in patients with HIV infection.
The appearance of Kaposi sarcoma lesions is often typical, but a skin biopsy of a lesion allows a definite diagnosis, as other conditions such as melanoma, fungal infections, and mycetoma mimic Kaposi sarcoma in appearance and location. The histopathology of Kaposi sarcoma shows red cells in slit-like spaces formed by atypical spindle cell proliferation of endothelial cells and associated with inflammatory cells.
Staging and prognosis in Kaposi sarcoma
There have been various attempts to classify Kaposi sarcoma, depending on whether it is localised or disseminated in the skin, and if there is a lymph node or internal organ involvement. The degree of immunosuppression present may also be used in staging systems.
Kaposi sarcoma has a variable course. Some patients develop only a few minor skin lesions while others have extensive external and internal disease. The latter lesions may result in fatal complications from bleeding, obstruction or perforation of an organ. Kaposi sarcoma is not curable, but it can be treated and its symptoms controlled.
What is the treatment for Kaposi sarcoma?
In HIV disease, if the lesions are not widespread or troublesome, often the best approach is to treat the underlying HIV infection with highly active antiretroviral drug combinations that suppress HIV replication (HAART).
HAART drugs reduce the frequency of Kaposi sarcoma and may also prevent its progression or the development of new lesions.
The improvement in immune function is thought to result in reduced levels of tumour growth-promoting proteins.
HAART plus chemotherapy is found to be more effective than HAART alone or chemotherapy alone in treating Kaposi sarcoma.
Iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma may improve or clear if it is possible to stop the immune suppressive medication.
The choice of a more specific treatment depends mainly on the extent of the disease.
Treating localised lesions
Small, localised lesions are generally only treated if they are painful or they are causing cosmetic problems. It should be noted that lesions tend to recur after local treatments. Treatments include:
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
Radiotherapy. This is most useful for classic Kaposi sarcoma and is less effective for HIV-associated disease.
Surgical excision of individual nodules.
Laser therapy using pulsed dye laser or pulsed carbon dioxide laser
Injection with anti-cancer drugs such as vinblastine
Topical application of alitretinoin gel (Panretin®). This drug is not yet available in New Zealand
Electrochemotherapy, a new treatment that uses electrical impulses to enhance effectiveness of bleomycin or cisplatin injected into tumours.
Treating extensive or internal lesions with systemic therapy
A combination of anti-cancer drugs are given, but at lower than usual dosages if there is immunosuppression.
Other chemotherapy treatments that are used in some international centres include bleomycin, etoposide, paclitaxel, docetaxel and liposomal forms of the conventional anti-cancer drugs, doxorubicin or daunorubicin. Liposomal means that the drugs are coated in small fat bubbles, or liposomes, which allows better absorption, resulting in less cardiac toxicity and myelotoxicity. Paclitaxel is approved for use in Kaposi sarcoma in advanced stages or as a second-line option.
Immunotherapy includes the use of interferon-alpha and imiquimod, sirolimus and thalidomide.
Kaposi sarcoma may arise in organ transplant patients. Switching from ciclosporin to sirolimus (rapamycin) has resulted in resolution of the sarcoma. This is primarily attributed to the anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenic effects of sirolimus (mTOR inhibitor).
Clinical trials into a wide range of other therapies are ongoing.
Photodynamic therapy is a combination of a photosensitiser and light energy.
Isotretinoin is a vitamin-A derivative usually used to treat acne.
Bexarotene is used to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Cytokine inhibitors (biologics)
The pregnancy hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG); Kaposi sarcoma lesions disappear in some women when they become pregnant.
Ganciclovir, cidofovir and foscarnet (antiviral medications) have been recently reported to result in lower rates of Kaposi sarcoma amongst those being treated for CMV retinitis (inflammation of the retina caused by cytomegalovirus) and are currently being studied. Aciclovir, another antiviral, has been tried but does not appear to work.
Targeting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF): drugs acting on VEGF receptors such as bevacizumab and sorafenib are being evaluated.
The immune-modulating agent lenalidomide is also under trial.
Metformin has anti-tumour effects and has been reported in case studies to improve classic KS skin lesions.
Schwartz RA, Micali G, Nasca MR, Scuderi L. Kaposi sarcoma: a continuing conundrum. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008 Aug; 59(2): 179–206. PubMed
Curtiss P, Strazzulla LC, Friedman-Kien AE. An update on Kaposi’s sarcoma: Epidemiology, pathogenesis and treatment. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2016; 6(4): 465–70. doi:10.1007/s13555-016-0152-3. Journal.
Uldrick TS, Whitby D. Update on KSHV epidemiology, Kaposi Sarcoma pathogenesis, and treatment of Kaposi Sarcoma. Cancer Lett. 2011; 305(2): 150–62. doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2011.02.006. PubMed.
Stallone G, Schena A, Infante B, Di Paolo S, Loverre A, Maggio G, Ranieri E, Gesualdo L, Schena FP, Grandaliano G. Sirolimus for Kaposi’s sarcoma in renal-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 1317–23. PubMed.
Kobayashi M, Takoori-Kondo A, Shindo K, et al. Successful treatment with paclitaxel of advanced AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Intern Med. 2002; 41: 1209–12. PubMed.
Human immunodeficiency virus
Kaposi sarcoma pathology
Kaposi's Sarcoma — Medline Plus
Kaposi Sarcoma — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Kawasaki Disease]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/kawasaki-disease]
Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Kawasaki disease — extra information
Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, MLNS, Kawasaki syndrome, Acute febrile mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, Kawasaki mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome
Systemic diseases, Blood vessel problems
Blood vessel problems
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2002. Revised by Dr Caroline Mahon, Registrar in Paediatrics and Dermatology, Greenlane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, April 2012.
What is Kawasaki disease?
Kawasaki disease is an acute febrile illness with inflammation of small- and medium-sized blood vessels throughout the body, in particular, the coronary arteries (blood vessels around the heart).
Kawasaki disease was previously known as mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. It was first described in Japan in 1967 by Dr Tomisaku Kawasaki, a paediatrician.
Who gets Kawasaki disease?
What causes Kawasaki disease?
The cause of Kawasaki disease is unknown.
What are the signs and symptoms of Kawasaki disease?
There are several clinically apparent stages of Kawasaki disease.
Typically a child with Kawasaki disease has a high swinging fever (beyond 39C), associated with a number of other features. The 5 cardinal signs of Kawasaki disease are:
Rash – the rash of Kawasaki disease may be morbilliform (measles-like), maculopapular (red patches and bumps), erythematous (red skin) or target-like and may be persistent over days or evanescent. Skin peeling may occur in the convalescent stage of the illness.
Oral signs – the typical changes include redness within the mouth or on the pharynx, strawberry tongue, and red or cracked lips.
Eye signs – redness of the bulbar conjunctivae (whites of the eyes) without exudate or stickiness.
Peripheral limb signs – including firm swelling of the hands and feet, sometimes including the fingers and toes, with redness of the palms and soles. Periungual desquamation (peeling of skin around the fingernails) may occur during the convalescent stage of the illness.
Lymphadenopathy – swollen lymph glands can occur, often on one side of the neck. One lymph gland of at least 1.5cm in length is considered diagnostically enlarged.
Not all of the cardinal signs may be present in any one child with Kawasaki disease and not all features may be present at the same time. Some features may appear and disappear before others arise.
Children with Kawasaki disease are often unusually irritable, out of proportion to the other signs exhibited. They may also have a range of other non-specific symptoms and signs including abdominal pain, diarrhoea, dysuria (pain passing urine), joint pain or arthritis, signs of meningitis or heart failure.
How is Kawasaki disease diagnosed?
There is no specific lab test that establishes the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease. definitively. The diagnosis is considered established when the following diagnostic criteria are met:
Fever for at least 5 days AND
At least 4 of the 5 cardinal signs listed above AND
The absence of any other illness to account for the signs and symptoms.
Illnesses that might present with some of the features of Kawasaki disease include scarlet fever, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, measles, COVID-19, and other viral exanthems (viral rashes), systemic onset juvenile arthritis (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or Stills disease) and drug reactions (morbilliform eruption, drug hypersensitivity syndrome and Stevens Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis)
What is the treatment of Kawasaki disease?
Usually children are treated with antipyretic and analgesic medication (eg paracetamol / acetominophen) until the 5th day of fever is reached. Once the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease is made a single large dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which is purified antibodies collected from many blood donations, is given. IVIG is most effective when given between the 5th and 10th days of illness. Low dose oral aspirin is also usually commenced at this time.
IVIG greatly reduces the risk of coronary artery disease and low dose aspirin reduces the risk of clotting within the coronary artery should coronary artery disease develop. Once children are treated they generally improve rapidly; most of the acute symptoms and signs resolve within 24 to 48 hours, and the fever abates. If the signs and symptoms fail to resolve or recur within days then a 2nd dose of IVIG is given.
What are the complications of Kawasaki disease?
The main complications of Kawasaki disease are the development of dilatation and/or narrowing of one or more coronary artery. These can lead to angina, myocardial infarction or sudden death. When children are treated with IVIG up to 10 days into the illness and respond quickly, the risk of subsequent coronary artery abnormality is reduced to 2-4% and most of these have mild abnormalities many of which resolve.
What other information do parents of children treated for Kawasaki disease need to know?
Kawasaki disease cannot be passed on to other family members.
There is a 2% risk of recurrence of Kawasaki disease within a period of several years.
IVIG affects the efficacy of live virus vaccines, i.e. MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) and varicella (chickenpox) vaccines, and these should be delayed for 11 months after the last dose of IVIG is given or repeated after 11 months if given earlier.
There is evidence that children and young people who have echocardiographic evidence of coronary artery aneurysm are more likely to develop coronary artery disease in adulthood than the general population and at an earlier age. Those with significant coronary artery disease should be followed long term by a cardiologist. Regular health examinations and cardiovascular risk assessments for these children throughout adulthood is advised.
ReferencesNewburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, Treatment, and Long-Term Management of Kawasaki Disease. A Statement for Health Professionals From the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, American Heart Association. Circulation. 2004; 110: 2747–71. PubMed
On DermNetBacterial infections
Other websites Kawasaki disease — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Keloid And Hypertrophic Scar]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/keloid-and-hypertrophic-scar]
Hypertrophic Scars and Keloids: A Complete Overview — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Keloid and hypertrophic scar
Keloid and hypertrophic scar — extra information
Keloid scar, Hypertrophic scar, Cheloid, Keloid cicatrix
Reactions, Inflammation
EE60, EL50.0, EE60.1, EL50.1
33659008, 403686008, 309691004, 19843006, 403685009
Keloid and hypertrophic scar
Authors: Dr Nicole Kah Mun Yoong, St George Hospital, Australia; Hana Numan, Senior Medical writer, DermNet (2022)Previous contributors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (2010)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What are keloids and hypertrophic scars?
A keloid scar is a firm, smooth, hard growth that occurs as a result of excessive scar formation. Keloids occur after skin injury; rarely, keloids can occur spontaneously without any significant preceding skin injury. They may develop on any part of the body and extend beyond the original wound margin, although the upper chest, shoulders, ears, and neck are especially prone to them.
Unlike keloid scars, hypertrophic scars are limited to the area of damaged skin. They are prone to occur when there is a lot of tension on a healing wound, the resultant scar is thicker than usual. Hypertrophic scars are more likely to regress and resolve compared to keloids as these tend to persist.
A hypertrophic scar on the upper back - the thickening does not extend beyond the confines of the injury A large keloid on the deltoid area after smallpox vaccination A large 'dumbbell' keloid on the earlobe Post-acne keloid scars Keloid scarring after skin grafting Keloids over the upper back
Who gets keloids and hypertrophic scars?
Hypertrophic scarring is common and can occur in all races and ages whereas keloid scars are less common and are more frequent in those with Fitzpatrick skin types III to VI.
Keloids are self-reported in 16% of Black individuals, and Chinese individuals are more likely to develop them when compared with those of Indian or Malaysian origin. White-skinned individuals and albinos appear to be the least affected. A genetic association has been noted with some HLA haplotypes and blood group A.
Multiple spontaneously arising keloids have been rarely associated with a number conditions including:
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Conjunctival corneal dystrophy
X-linked recessive polyfibromatosis
Novel X-linked syndrome with filamin A mutation.
What causes keloids and hypertrophic scars?
The exact pathogenesis of keloids and hypertrophic scar formation is unknown. Keloids may develop after minor injuries such as trauma, burns, insect bites, surgery, cryotherapy, topical therapies (eg, imiquimod), acne, infections (eg, shingles), and immunisation. They are more common in wounds that have been allowed to heal by secondary intention. Keloids can arise months to years after an injury.
The pathogenesis is hypothesised to involve dysregulation of the normal healing process resulting in excessive production of collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and extracellular matrix proteins. There is an increase in the number of fibroblasts and mast cells. Growth factors and cytokines are altered in keloid scars, with increased amounts of TNF alpha, interferon-beta and interleukin 6.
What are the clinical features of keloids and hypertrophic scars?
Keloids are usually:
Firm, smooth, and raised
Can be uncomfortable and itchy
Can occur years after injury
Grow beyond the initiating wound area.
Hypertrophic scars are usually:
Slightly raised or flat
Can be uncomfortable and itchy
Usually occurs within weeks of injury
Limited to the confines of the initiating wound.
They most commonly occur in areas of high anatomic skin tension:
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Keloids are more common in those with darker skin types; the lesions are less pink and more pigmented.
What are the complications of keloids and hypertrophic scars?
Cosmetic disfigurement
Adverse social and psychological effects
Thick, tight keloids may limit movement and limb growth in children
Ossification within keloids
How are keloids and hypertrophic scars diagnosed?
Keloids and hypertrophic scars are diagnosed clinically on the basis of history and clinical features. A skin biopsy may be needed if there is diagnostic uncertainty.
Although distinguishing between keloids and hypertrophic scarring can be difficult, it is important when considering intensive treatment options. Distinguishing clinical features include onset from injury, raised appearance, growth outside of wound margins, and regression.
The histology of hypertrophic scars may reveal:
Increased number of fibroblasts
Increased density of collagen fibres in the dermis.
Whorls and nodules of particularly thick homogenous collagen bundles (dense fibrils), located irregularly throughout the dermis (keloidal collagen)
Keloidal collagen may be absent in up to half of keloids.
What are the differential diagnoses of keloids and hypertrophic scars?
Lesions that may mimic keloids in appearance include:
Some skin tumours, eg, adnexal tumour, Spitz naevi, dermatofibromas, and dermatofibrosarcoma
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
Cutaneous pseudolymphoma
Morphoea (localised scleroderma).
What is the treatment for keloids and hypertrophic scars?
A hypertrophic scar may resolve spontaneously and is likely to respond better to treatment than a keloid. Conversely, keloids are likely to persist without spontaneous resolution and prove resistant to treatment.
The aims of treatment are to reduce the cosmetic disfigurement and functional problems caused by the keloid and reduce pain and itch.
The following measures are helpful in at least some patients:
Emollient creams and oils massaged regularly into the scar
Polyurethane or silicone scar reduction patches
Oral or topical tranilast (an inhibitor of collagen synthesis)
Pressure dressings and garments
Surgical excision (in keloids, surgical excision may result in a new keloid even larger than the original one)
Intralesional corticosteroid injection, repeated every few weeks
Intralesional 5-fluorouracil
Superficial X-ray treatment (delivered within 48 hrs after surgical excision)
Steroid impregnated tape
Botulinum toxin injections.
Scar dressings should be worn for 12–24 hours per day, for at least 8 to 12 weeks, and perhaps for much longer.
How do you prevent keloids and hypertrophic scars?
As these often occur after trauma, the following strategies may help prevent their formation:
Minimal tension surgery
Eversion of wound edges during suturing
Limit the number of sutures used
Avoid unnecessary surgery / cosmetic procedures in keloid-prone individuals and areas.
What is the outcome for keloids and hypertrophic scars?
Hypertrophic and keloid scars are harmless and do not change into skin cancer. However, patients with keloids have a slightly higher risk of skin cancer than non-keloid individuals.
Berman B, Maderal A, Raphael B. Keloids and Hypertrophic Scars: Pathophysiology, Classification, and Treatment. Dermatol Surg. 2017;43 Suppl 1:S3-S18. doi:10.1097/DSS.0000000000000819. Journal
Coop CA, Schaefer SM, England RW. Extensive keloid formation and progression after each vaccination. Hum Vaccin. 2007;3(4):127-129. doi:10.4161/hv.3.4.4140. Journal
Ogawa R, Dohi T, Tosa M, Aoki M, Akaishi S. The Latest Strategy for Keloid and Hypertrophic Scar Prevention and Treatment: The Nippon Medical School (NMS) Protocol. J Nippon Med Sch. 2021;88(1):2–9. doi:10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2021_88-106. Journal
Wolfram D, Tzankov A, Pülzl P, Piza-Katzer H. Hypertrophic scars and keloids--a review of their pathophysiology, risk factors, and therapeutic management. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(2):171–181. doi:10.1111/j.1524-4725.2008.34406.x. Journal
Melanoma in skin of colour
Excision of skin lesions
Keloids — British Association of Dermatologists
Keloid Research Foundation
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Keratoacanthoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/keratoacanthoma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Keratoacanthoma — extra information
Lesions (cancerous), Lesions (benign)
254662007, 254664008, 716774008, 14442007, 254663002, 417264005
Authors: Associate Professor Amanda Oakley, 1999; updated by Katrina Tan, Medical Student, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist, Christchurch, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. November 2021.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is a keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthoma (KA) is a common, rapidly growing, locally destructive skin tumour. KAs may regress spontaneously with scarring, but clinically they may be indistinguishable from well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and the clinical course may be unpredictable. Thus, many clinicians and pathologists prefer the term SCC, KA-type and recommend surgical excision.
Who gets a keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthoma is most common in fair-skinned older males with a history of chronic sun exposure. Most patients are over 60 years of age and it is twice as common in males than in females. The incidence rate in Queensland, Australia is 409/100,000 person-years.
There is an increased incidence in:
Patients who are immunocompromised, such as solid organ transplant patients or other patients on long-term immunosuppressive medication
Patients with genetic cancer syndromes such as:
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma (Ferguson-Smith syndrome)
Eruptive keratoacanthoma of Grzybowski
Incontinentia pigmenti
Patients who received excessive treatment with psoralen-UVA (PUVA) photochemotherapy for psoriasis
Patients treated for metastatic melanoma with BRAF inhibitors such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib
Patients treated with hedgehog pathway inhibitors for basal cell carcinoma, such as vismodegib.
What causes a keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthoma arises from the infundibulum of the hair follicle. The specific pathogenetic mechanisms are unclear but may involve aberrant regulation of the WNT signal transduction pathways and mutations in the tumour suppression gene TP53.
The risk factors are probably the same as for squamous cell carcinoma, and include:
Exposure to ultraviolet light
Chemical carcinogens (e.g. cigarette smoking, industrial workers exposed to tar, pitch, and mineral oils)
Cutaneous trauma (e.g. surgery, radiation)
Human papillomavirus infection.
What are the clinical features of a keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthomas typically present as a solitary, rapidly growing nodule on sun-exposed skin of the face and upper limbs. Keratoacanthomas are sharply demarcated, firm, erythematous or skin-coloured, with a classic central hyperkeratotic plug and an even shoulder. Removal of the keratotic core will leave a ‘crater’-like appearance to the lesion.
There are several variants and syndromes of keratoacanthoma:
Solitary keratoacanthoma (most common)
Single lesion, growing rapidly within a few weeks up to a diameter of 1–2 cm. After several weeks of stability, the lesion starts to spontaneously regress, eventually leaving a depressed scar. The time from first appearance to complete regression is usually 4–6 months.
Keratoacanthoma centrifugum marginatum
A rare variant of KA, characterised by peripheral expansion and central healing with scarring, often with no tendency to regression. Tumours may reach a diameter of 20 cm or more.
Diagnosis may be difficult and they may be confused with inflammatory dermatoses and other tumours.
Giant keratoacanthoma
Typically, a solitary KA grows larger than 2cm.
Commonly involves the eyelids or nose.
Multiple familial keratoacanthoma of Witten and Zak.
A rare, autosomal, dominantly-inherited variant of KA that presents in childhood with overlapping features of the Ferguson-Smith and Grzybowski subtypes.
It is characterised by multiple tiny papular lesions and larger, more typical KAs.
Generalised eruptive keratoacanthomas of Grzybowski
Multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma of Ferguson-Smith disease
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Keratoacanthomas are much less common in patients with skin of colour, but the clinical features are the same.
What are the complications of keratoacanthoma?
The complications of keratoacanthoma include:
Destruction of adjacent structures
How is keratoacanthoma diagnosed?
Keratoacanthoma is diagnosed on the basis of a typical history, the clinical signs and histopathology.
The classic keratoacanthoma has a crateriform appearance when viewed histologically at low power. Higher power reveals enlarged atypical keratinocytes with eosinophilic cytoplasm that do not extend beyond the level of the sweat glands. These features may be impossible to see in partial or shave biopsy samples, which are not recommended.
Unfortunately, dermoscopy cannot reliably discriminate KA from SCC.
What is the differential diagnosis for keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthomas must be distinguished from well-differentiated SCC. Other differential diagnoses include:
Nodular basal cell carcinoma
Giant molluscum contagiosum
What is the treatment for keratoacanthoma?
Most keratoacanthomas are treated surgically. Although they may resolve spontaneously, it is usually prudent to excise them, unless there is clear evidence that regression is in progress.
It is usually best to assume a KA-like lesion is an SCC and to manage accordingly in line with local or national guidance, until proven otherwise.
Curettage and electrodessication
Topical or intralesional chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, bleomycin, methotrexate).
Samples for histology will be absent or may be imperfect, but the above techniques may be deemed suitable after considering the size and location of the tumour, the overall health of the patient and the likely morbidity from surgery.
What is the outcome for keratoacanthoma?
Keratoacanthoma is regarded as benign and thus has an excellent prognosis following surgical excision.
Gleich T, Chiticariu E, Huber M, Hohl D. Keratoacanthoma: a distinct entity? Exp Dermatol. 2016;25(2):85–91. doi:10.1111/exd.12880. PubMed
Kwiek B, Schwartz RA. Keratoacanthoma (KA): An update and review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(6):1220–33. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2015.11.033. Journal
Misago N, Inoue T, Koba S, Narisawa Y. Keratoacanthoma and other types of squamous cell carcinoma with crateriform architecture: classification and identification. J Dermatol. 2013;40(6):443–52. doi:10.1111/1346-8138.12104. Journal
Savage JA, Maize JC, Sr. Keratoacanthoma clinical behavior: a systematic review. Am J Dermatopathol. 2014;36(5):422–9. Journal
Schwartz RA. Keratoacanthoma: a clinico-pathologic enigma. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(2 Pt 2):326–33. doi:10.1111/j.1524-4725.2004.30080.x. Journal
Tisack A, Fotouhi A, Fidai C, Friedman BJ, Ozog D, Veenstra J. A clinical and biological review of keratoacanthoma. Br J Dermatol. 2021;185(3):487–98. doi:10.1111/bjd.20389. Journal
Karaa A, Khachemoune A. Keratoacanthoma: a tumor in search of a classification. Int J Dermatol. 2007;46(7):671–8. doi:10.1111/j.1365-4632.2007.03260.x. Journal
Claeson M, Pandeya N, Dusingize J, et al. Assessment of Incidence Rate and Risk Factors for Keratoacanthoma Among Residents of Queensland, Australia. JAMA Dermatol. 2020;156(12):1324–32. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2020.4097. Journal
Generalised eruptive keratoacanthoma
Eyelid skin problems
Skin lesions, tumours, and cancers
Squamous cell carcinoma dermoscopy
Keratoacanthoma — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Keratolysis Exfoliativa]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/keratolysis-exfoliativa]
Exfoliative keratolysis (keratolysis exfoliativa, focal palmar peeling)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Keratolysis exfoliativa
Keratolysis exfoliativa — extra information
Focal palmar peeling, Exfoliative keratolysis, Lamellar dishydrosis, Dyshidrosis lamellosa sicca, Dermatitis exfoliativa
Keratolysis exfoliativa
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999. Updated by Dr Oakley, December 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is keratolysis exfoliativa?
Keratolysis exfoliativa is a common skin condition in which there is focal peeling of the palms and less often the soles. It is also known as exfoliative keratolysis, dyshidrosis lamellosa sicca, and focal palmar peeling.
Exfoliative keratolysis Exfoliative keratolysis Exfoliative keratolysis
Who gets keratolysis exfoliativa?
Keratolysis exfoliativa generally presents in young active adults. Some individuals have a family history of the disorder.
What is the cause of keratolysis exfoliativa?
The cause of keratolysis exfoliativa is unknown. Microscopy reveals cleavage within the outside horny layer of skin, the stratum corneum. It is thought that for some reason the desmosomes on the corneocytes separate from each other prematurely. No genetic abnormality has been detected to date (2018).
The symptoms are aggravated by exposure to irritants including water, soap, detergents and solvents.
What are the clinical features of keratolysis exfoliativa?
The first sign of keratolysis exfoliativa is one or more superficial air-filled blisters on the fingers or palms. The blisters burst to leave expanding collarettes of scale and circular or oval, tender, erythematous peeled areas. These peeled areas lack a normal barrier function and may become dry and cracked. However, they are not generally itchy.
Sometimes on the ends of the fingers, the split in the skin is deeper, in which case the skin feels hard and numb and takes longer to peel off. There can be multiple layers of peeling skin (lamellae).
Eventually normal skin forms, but frequently exfoliative keratolysis recurs within a few weeks.
How is keratolysis exfoliativa diagnosed?
Keratolysis exfoliativa is diagnosed clinically. Supportive investigations may be undertaken.
Skin biopsy shows cleavage and partially degraded corneodesmosomes within the stratum corneum.
Skin scrapings sent for laboratory tests for fungal infections are negative.
What is the differential diagnosis with keratolysis exfoliativa?
Keratolysis exfoliativa is distinct from the following conditions.
Pompholyx, an itchy form of eczema in which there are small fluid-filled blisters.
Palmoplantar psoriasis, in which there are scaly patches
Tinea manuum, but scrapings for fungal culture are negative in keratolysis exfoliativa
Keratolytic winter erythema, a rare inherited condition characterised by red peeling hands and feet
Palmoplantar keratoderma
Localised epidermolysis bullosa simplex, in which blistering occurs
Circumscribed palmar hypokeratosis
What is the treatment for keratolysis exfoliativa?
Keratolysis exfoliativa does not improve with topical steroids, unlike hand dermatitis.
The following may be helpful:
Protection from irritants
Emollient hand creams especially those containing urea, lactic acid, or silicone
Hausauer AK, Cohen DE. Keratolysis exfoliativa. Dermatol Online J. 2015 Dec 16;21(12). pii: 13030/qt6mv338nx. PubMed PMID: 26990340.
Chang YY, van der Velden J, van der Wier G, et al. Keratolysis exfoliativa (dyshidrosis lamellosa sicca): a distinct peeling entity. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Nov;167(5):1076–84. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11175.x. Epub 2012 Oct 5. PubMed PMID: 23039091.
Lee YC, Rycroft RJ, White IR, McFadden JP. Recurrent focal palmar peeling. Australas J Dermatol. 1996 Aug;37(3):143–4. PubMed PMID: 8771868.
Hand skin conditions
Foot skin conditions
Keratolytic winter erythema
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Keratosis Pilaris]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/keratosis-pilaris]
Keratosis Pilaris: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Keratosis pilaris — extra information
Atrophoderma vermiculatum, Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans, Ulerythema ophyrogenes, Keratosis pilaris rubra, Keratosis pilaris atrophicans, Keratosis pilaris faciei, Keratosis pilaris faciei et colli, KP
5132005, 400059005, 2736005, 400126005, 400043005
Authors: Dr Sarah Winter, Core Surgical Trainee, Royal Glamorgan Hospital; Dr Richard Motley, Consultant Dermatologist, Welsh Institute of Dermatology, Wales. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. March 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is keratosis pilaris?
Keratosis pilaris is a very common, dry skin condition caused by keratin accumulation in the hair follicles.
The Latin term keratosis means ‘scaly skin’, and pilaris means ‘hair’. Keratosis pilaris usually starts in childhood but becomes more obvious during the teenage years and adulthood. It is harmless and is not infectious.
Keratosis pilaris Keratosis pilaris Keratosis pilaris
Who gets keratosis pilaris?
Keratosis pilaris is typically seen in children and young adults. It affects 50–70% of teenagers and 40% of adults. It has been associated with other skin diseases such as atopic eczema and ichthyosis.
What causes keratosis pilaris?
Keratosis pilaris occurs due to abnormal keratinisation of the upper portion lining of the hair follicle. The keratin fills the follicle instead of exfoliating.
The cause of keratosis pilaris is not fully understood, but it is thought to have a genetic association with autosomal dominant inheritance. Correlations have been made with mutations in filaggrin (a key protein in skin barrier function).
Keratosis pilaris tends to be prominent in the winter months and is likely due to the reduced moisture content of the air.
What are the clinical features of keratosis pilaris?
Keratosis pilaris most commonly presents on the extensor surfaces of the upper arms and thighs. The buttocks, trunk, chest, face, and distal extremities can also be involved.
Keratosis pilaris may occasionally be associated with redness and pigmentation of the skin of the cheeks (erythromelanosis folllicularis facei et coli and keratosis pilaris rouge), loss of eyebrow hair (ulerythema ophryogenes), and small atrophic areas over the cheeks (atrophoderma vermiculatum).
Keratosis pilaris rubra faciei Ulerythema ophryogenes Atrophoderma vermiculata
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The bumps are usually the colour of the patient’s skin. However, they can present as red areas on white skin or brown/black on darker skin.
What are the complications of keratosis pilaris?
Scarring with hair loss
How is keratosis pilaris diagnosed?
Keratosis pilaris is a clinical diagnosis. Evaluation of the lesion can aid diagnosis:
Dermoscopy: reveals abnormalities of the hair shafts — thin, short, coiled, or embedded in the stratum corneum. Scaling and erythema may also be present.
Punch biopsy: reveals epidermal hyperkeratosis, hypergranulosis, plugged hair follicles, and mild superficial perivascular lymphocytic inflammation.
What is the differential diagnosis for keratosis pilaris?
Phrynoderma due to nutritional deficiencies
What is the treatment for keratosis pilaris?
Use of an exfoliating sponge or scrub in the shower or bath
Moisturising cream that contains urea, salicylic acid, lactic acid or alpha hydroxy acids (they either moisturise or help loosen the adherent scale in the follicles)
Short courses of moderate potency topical steroids can be used for itch
Pulse dye laser treatment or intense pulsed light to help with erythema
Laser-assisted hair removal for ingrown hairs
What is the outcome for keratosis pilaris?
There is no cure for keratosis pilaris, however, it often clears up during adult life. This is because adults tend to be better at managing the skin condition with the measures discussed above. Any atrophy or scarring with hair loss may be permanent.
Cohen L, Seminario-Vidal L, Lockey RF. Dermatologic Problems Commonly Seen by the Allergist/Immunologist. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(1):102–12. doi:10.1016/j.jaip.2019.07.019. Journal
Fenner J, Silverberg NB. Skin diseases associated with atopic dermatitis. Clin Dermatol. 2018;36(5):631–40. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2018.05.004. Journal
Gerbig AW. Treating keratosis pilaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47(3):457. doi:10.1067/mjd.2002.122733. Journal
Gruber R, Sugarman JL, Crumrine D, et al. Sebaceous gland, hair shaft, and epidermal barrier abnormalities in keratosis pilaris with and without filaggrin deficiency. Am J Pathol. 2015;185(4):1012–21. doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.12.012. Journal
Ibrahim O, Khan M, Bolotin D, et al. Treatment of keratosis pilaris with 810-nm diode laser: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151(2):187–91. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.2211. Journal
Poskitt L, Wilkinson JD. Natural history of keratosis pilaris. Br J Dermatol. 1994;130(6):711–3. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.1994.tb03406.x. Journal
Thomas M, Khopkar US. Keratosis pilaris revisited: is it more than just a follicular keratosis?. Int J Trichology. 2012;4(4):255–8. doi:10.4103/0974-7753.111215. Journal
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Acne and other follicular disorders
Keratosis pilaris — NHS
Keratosis pilaris — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Keratosis Pilaris Atrophicans Faciei]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/keratosis-pilaris-atrophicans-faciei]
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei — extra information
Ulerythema ophryogenes, Keratosis rubra pilaris faciei atrophicans
400059005, 238626006, 400126005, 2736005
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Author: Olivia Egan, Medical Student, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. DermNet Technical Editor: Elaine Mary Luther, Medical Student, Ross University School of Medicine, Barbados. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. February 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is an uncommon form of keratosis pilaris with scar-like follicular depressions and loss of hair particularly in the eyebrows [1]. This results in atrophy and permanent loss of hair in the affected areas.
Keratosis pilaris is also called ulerythema ophryogenes. Ulerythema means ‘scar with redness’, and 'ophryo' refers to the eyebrow.
Keratosis pilaris Keratosis pilaris faciei atrophicans Keratosis pilaris faciei atrophicans
Who gets keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei usually occurs sporadically; however, autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance have been described [1,2,3]. It first appears in infancy, and is mainly diagnosed in children and adolescents.
What causes keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is caused by abnormal keratinisation of the follicular infundibulum. Scale fills the follicle and obstructs the hair shaft resulting in inflammation. Over time, chronic inflammation results in atrophy and alopecia [1].
What are the clinical features of keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is characterised by facial inflammatory keratotic papules.
Onset is usually a few months after birth with facial keratotic papules and erythematous keratotic follicular papules involving the lateral third of the eyebrows.
As the condition progresses, atrophy and loss of eyebrow hair occur.
Other areas of the scalp and face can be involved including the forehead, temples, and cheeks [1,3].
There is usually also widespread keratosis pilaris on limbs and trunk [3].
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Associated syndromes
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is occasionally associated with Noonan syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome [4].
How is keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei diagnosed?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is diagnosed clinically.
If a skin biopsy is performed, nonspecific histopathologic features include a widened infundibulum, plugged hair follicle, loss of hair follicle, superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate, and dermal fibrosis [1,3].
What is the differential diagnosis for keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei is on a spectrum with other follicular keratotic disorders, and is usually regarded as one form of keratosis pilaris atrophicans, with overlapping features commonly seen [3,5].
Keratosis pilaris rubra faciei
Keratosis pilaris rubra faciei is a variant of keratosis pilaris in which redness is prominent. It is characterised by perifollicular erythema on the forehead, cheeks, and neck without atrophy or hair loss.
Erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli
Atrophoderma vermiculatum
Atrophoderma vermiculatum is a variant of keratosis pilaris atrophicans with prominent follicular atrophy resulting in a honeycombed pattern on the cheeks developing in childhood [3,5].
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei
Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans
Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans is a severe form of keratosis pilaris atrophicans with widespread follicular papules, scarring hair loss, keratoderma and keratitis [3,5].
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Frontal fibrosing alopecia is a type of follicular lichen planus or lichen planopilaris in which there are facial follicular papules, loss of the lateral eyebrows, and receding frontal hairline due to scarring alopecia. It mainly affects postmenopausal women.
What is the treatment for keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
There is no cure for keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei. The following can be useful to minimise the follicular scale.
Exfoliation — removing the surface follicular scale with a pumice stone or exfoliating sponge
Keratolytic moisturisers containing urea, salicylic acid, or alpha-hydroxy acid
Pulse dye laser or intense pulsed light (IPL) can reduce erythema temporarily but it tends to recur. Sun exposure tends to worsen redness, so sun protection is recommended.
What is the outcome for keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei?
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei usually becomes less noticeable after puberty. However, atrophy with hair loss is permanent.
Landis MN, Fowler J, Corona R. Keratosis pilaris atrophicans. In: Post TW (ed). UpToDate [internet]. Waltham MA: UpToDate Inc; 2020. Available from: www.uptodate.com/contents/keratosis-pilaris-atrophicans [cited 3 Feb 2020]
Callaway SR, Lesher JL Jr. Keratosis pilaris atrophicans: case series and review. Pediatr Dermatol. 2004;21(1):14–17. doi:10.1111/j.0736-8046.2004.21103.x. PubMed
Cohen-Barak E, Danial-Farran N, Hammad H, et al. Desmoglein 4 mutation underlies autosomal recessive keratosis pilaris atrophicans. Acta Derm Venereol. 2018;98(8):809–10. doi:10.2340/00015555-2976. PubMed
Morton CM, Bhate C, Janniger CK, Schwartz RA. Ulerythema ophryogenes: updates and insights. Cutis. 2014;93(2):83–7. PubMed
Judge MR, McLean WHI, Munro CS. Disorders of keratinization. In: Burns T, Breathnach S, Cox N, Griffiths C (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology, 7th edn, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Acne and other follicular disorders
Facial skin problems
Keratosis pilaris atrophicans — UpToDate
What is ulerythema ophryogenes (keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei)?
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Kerion]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/kerion]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Kerion — extra information
Tinea kerion, Kerion celsi, Suppurative dermatophytosis, Suppurative ringworm
1F28.4, 1F28.0, 1F28.Y
1908700152983002, 73860009
Author: Dr Maneka Gnanasegaram, Dermatology Registrar, Greenlane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, 2012.
A kerion is an abscess caused by fungal infection. It most often occurs on the scalp (tinea capitis), but it may also arise on any site exposed to the fungus such as face (tinea faciei) and upper limbs (tinea corporis). It is often misdiagnosed as bacterial infection.
What does a kerion look like?
A kerion presents as a boggy pus-filled lump, often several centimetres in diameter. It is characterised by marked inflammation. Hairs within the kerion are loose and fall out, often resulting in a bald area (localised alopecia).
Enlargement of the regional lymph nodes can occur, and some people become systemically unwell with fevers and malaise. It may be followed by a widespread itchy eczema-like rash (dermatophytide).
A kerion is caused by dramatic immune response to a dermatophyte fungal infection (tinea). The most common fungi found in kerion are:
Trichophyton tonsurans
Trichophyton verrucosum
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
Trichophyton rubrum is not a common cause of kerion.
How is kerion diagnosed?
Suspicion is raised due to the typical appearance of a kerion. Examination using a Wood lamp emitting long wavelength UVA may reveal yellow-green fluorescence if kerion is due to Microsporum canis, but is often negative even when this is the responsible organism because the inflammation obscures the presence of the fungus.
To confirm the diagnosis, scrapings and hair samples may be taken from the affected area for microscopy and fungal culture (laboratory tests for fungal infection). A bacterial swab should be considered as secondary infection with bacteria is common.
Is kerion contagious?
What is the treatment of kerion?
Kerion should be treated by oral antifungal agents. A course of 6-8 weeks of treatment is normally prescribed at minimum. Topical antifungal agents are not effective due to deep invasion of fungus into the hair follicle.
Griseofulvin (no longer available in New Zealand)
Antibiotics may be needed if there is bacterial infection present. Antifungal shampoos containing ketoconazole or ciclopirox help to reduce the risk of spread of infection to others.
The hair normally grows back after the infection is treated, but sometimes hair loss is permanent, especially if the infection has been longstanding.
Dermatology. Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP. Second edition. Mosby Elsevier
Medscape reference. Several titles.
The International Foundation for Dermatology Management of tinea capitis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Knuckle Pads]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/knuckle-pads]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Knuckle pad — extra information
Garrods pad, Heloderma, Holoderma
FB51.1, LD2H.Y, FB51.Z
16687001, 1271009, 723976005
Author: Dr Delwyn Dyall-Smith FACD, Dermatologist, Australia, 2012.
What is a knuckle pad?
A knuckle pad is a well-defined thickening over a finger joint. They are also called Garrod pads or holoderma. Knuckle pads are classified as a form of fibromatosis along with Dupuytren contracture (palmar fibromatosis), pachydermodactyly, Ledderhose syndrome (plantar fibromatosis) and Peyronie disease (penile fibromatosis).
Knuckle pads Knuckle pads Knuckle pads
Who gets knuckle pads and why?
Knuckle pads can develop as part of an inherited syndrome, may run in families together with other forms of fibromatosis, or as a sporadic occurrence.
Examples of genetic syndromes that include knuckle pads as a feature are:
Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma (MIM 1144200)
Bart-Pumphrey syndrome (MIM 149200)
Acrokeratoelastoidosis of Costa (MIM 101850)
Camptodactyly (MIM 114200).
There is some debate as to whether true knuckle pads are a response to trauma (calluses). These are more likely to be callosities developing from repetitive pressure or friction, for example, occupational, sporting, finger sucking/chewing, or bulimia nervosa.
Some also attempt to distinguish ‘Dupuytren nodules’ and ‘dorsal cutaneous pads’, the former occurring only in patients with Dupuytren contracture and the latter occurring in both control and Dupuytren contracture populations.
What are the clinical features of a knuckle pad?
A knuckle pad is more often located over a proximal interphalangeal (second) joint than over a knuckle (metacarpophalangeal/first joint) or distal interphalangeal (third) joint.
The pad may be seen over just one joint or many. The hands are most commonly affected but other joints, such as the feet and knees, may be involved.
Knuckle pads are well-defined, smooth, firm thickenings that can be flat or more obvious and dome-shaped. They generally do not cause any symptoms but can be tender or painful.
How are knuckle pads diagnosed?
Usually, knuckle pads are diagnosed clinically. However, there are several other conditions that may cause confusion including granuloma annulare, pachydermodactyly, rheumatoid nodules, and synovitis resulting in swollen joints.
Ultrasound can be useful for distinguishing knuckle pads from synovitis.
Should a skin biopsy be performed, histology shows hyperkeratosis and acanthosis of the epidermis and thickening of the dermis and individual collagen fibres. When associated with a keratin 9 gene mutation, as in epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma, suprabasal epidermolysis is also seen.
What is the treatment for a knuckle pad?
In general, treatment is not required for a knuckle pad. Avoidance of repetitive behaviour if possible may improve the situation. Moisturisers may be useful if the knuckle pads are hyperkeratotic. Surgery has been used, but can be complicated by the development of keloid scars.
Balighi K, Moeineddin F, Lajevardi V, Ahmadreza R. A family with leukonychia totalis. Indian J Dermatol. 2010;55(1):102–4. DOI: 10.4103/0019-5154.60365. PMID: 20418990; PMCID: PMC2856358.
Codispoti A, Colombo E, Zocchi L, Serra V, et al. Knuckle pads, in an epidermal palmoplantar keratoderma patient with Keratin 9 R163W transgradiens expression. Eur J Dermatol. 2009 Mar-Apr;19(2):114–8. DOI: 10.1684/ejd.2008.0575. Epub 2008 Dec 23. PMID: 19106041.
Lopez-Ben R, Dehghanpisheh K, Chatham WW, Lee DH, Oakes J, Alarcón GS. Ultrasound appearance of knuckle pads. Skeletal Radiol. 2006 Nov;35(11):823–7. DOI: 10.1007/s00256-006-0110-8. Epub 2006 May 11. PMID: 16688449.
Malik S, Schott J, Schiller J, Junge A, Baum E, Koch MC. Fifth finger camptodactyly maps to chromosome 3q11.2-q13.12 in a large German kindred. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;16(2):265–9. DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201957. Epub 2007 Nov 14. PMID: 18000522.
Nemoto-Hasebe I, Akiyama M, Kudo S, Ishiko A, Tanaka A, Arita K, Shimizu H. Novel mutation p.Gly59Arg in GJB6 encoding connexin 30 underlies palmoplantar keratoderma with pseudoainhum, knuckle pads and hearing loss. Br J Dermatol. 2009 Aug;161(2):452–5. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09137.x. Epub 2009 Mar 30. PMID: 19416251.
Rayan GM, Ali M, Orozco J. Dorsal pads versus nodules in the normal population and Dupuytren's disease patients. J Hand Surg Am. 2010 Oct;35(10):1571–9. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2010.06.001. PMID: 20800974.
Rook's Textbook of Dermatology
Palmoplantar keratoderma
Knuckle Pads — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Ktp Laser Treatment]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/ktp-laser-treatment]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
KTP laser treatment — extra information
Potassium titanyl phosphate laser
118357007, 443187002
Author: Anoma Ranaweera B.V.Sc; PhD (Clinical Biochemistry, University of Liverpool, UK), July 2014.
Introduction - laser
Introduction - KTP laser
The term LASER stands for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Lasers produce an intense beam of light of a particular colour and wavelength which can be varied in its intensity and pulse duration.
Lasers can be used for the treatment of various dermatological conditions depending on the wavelength, pulse characteristics, and fluence (energy output) of the laser.
A variety of lasers are available; they are differentiated by the medium that produces the laser beam and the wavelength generated.
What is a KTP laser?
A KTP laser is a solid-state laser that uses a potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) crystal as its frequency doubling device. The KTP crystal is engaged by a beam generated by a neodymium:yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd: YAG) laser. This is directed through the KTP crystal to produce a beam in the green visible spectrum with a wavelength of 532 nm.
How does a KTP laser work?
The KTP laser works on the principle of selective photothermolysis.
The selected wavelength of laser light is absorbed to a high degree by the target structure (called a chromophore) and is absorbed less by surrounding tissue.
The skin chromophores targeted by the KTP laser are melanin, oxyhaemoglobin and red tattoo pigment.
The pulse duration of laser energy is shorter than the target structure’s thermal relaxation time (the time taken for the target to cool by 50% of its peak temperature after irradiation).
This ensures that the impact of thermal energy is limited to the target structure and does not affect the surrounding tissue. Modern KTP lasers also have integrated cooling systems to help protect the epidermis, particularly when doing vascular work.
When KTP laser light hits the skin, it is reflected, transmitted, or absorbed.
Absorbed light energy is converted to thermal energy (heat) by the intended targets (chromophores), thereby killing the target cells.
Complications result when energy intended for the target chromophore is nonselectively diffused and absorbed by surrounding tissues and structures. Because melanin is targeted by this wavelength, the KTP laser is rarely used in darker skin types.
The effects of the KTP laser on the skin can be modified by altering the pulse width and degree of cooling. In the case of tattoo pigment, the pulse width is narrowed to nanoseconds (Q-switched KTP) and the clinical effect is photomechanical/acoustic. Picosecond lasers may be more effective for pigment fragmentation but at very short pulse widths, the creation of a plasma veil is a limiting factor.
What is KTP laser used for?
The following skin disorders may be treated with KTP lasers using a US Federal Drug Agency (FDA)-approved machine, such as The Excel V® (Cutera). The Revlite SI (ConBio) is a Q-switched KTP laser. Both of these lasers also have a 1064 nm module.
Cutaneous vascular lesions
KTP laser is useful in the treatment of some superficial port wine stains (vascular malformation) and a variety of acquired cutaneous vascular lesions, including telangiectasis, cherry angiomas and poikiloderma of Civatte.
Light energy emitted by the Nd:YAG pumped KTP laser is primarily absorbed by oxyhemoglobin contained within blood vessels, thus minimising thermal damage to other structures.
Laser treatment parameters are based on several factors, including lesion location, lesion morphology, and patient skin phototype.
Lower energy densities are necessary for anatomic locations with an increased risk of scarring, such as the anterior chest, neck, and periorbital area. Skin cooling is essential.
Only patients with Fitzpatrick skin types I to III are eligible.
Successful treatment of poikiloderma of Civatte can be achieved with several treatment sessions. The KTP laser is particularly suited to treating facial telangiectasia.
Pigmented and non-vascular skin lesions
KTP lasers can be effective for freckles, superficial dyspigmentation (eg epidermal melasma) and lentigos.
In the removal of pigmentation, energy from KTP laser light is selectively absorbed by the melanin that causes pigmentation. Skin cooling is reduced resulting in a photo-thermal injury to the melanin.
KTP lasers can be effective in erythematotelangiectatic rosacea.
Used in the Q-switched mode, the KTP laser can be used to remove red-coloured tattoo ink (a cause of adverse tattoo reactions).
The extremely short pulse width (ns) allows for vaporisation of the ink.
Even though 532 nm wavelength of the KTP laser is well absorbed by other colours, the Nd:YAG (1,064 nm) and the alexandrite lasers (755 nm) penetrate better and result in a superior clinical result for dark-coloured (blue/black) tattoos.
What does the laser procedure involve?
The patient should wear eye protection, consisting of an opaque covering or goggles, throughout treatment.
Treatment with the KTP laser consists of placing a hand piece against the surface of the skin and activating the laser. Many patients describe each pulse to feel like the snapping of a rubber band against the skin.
Topical anaesthetic or forced air cooling may be applied to the area, but is not necessary if there is a cooling system.
Immediately following treatment, a cool pack may be applied to soothe the treated area.
Care should be taken in the first few days following treatment to avoid scrubbing the area, and/or use of abrasive skin cleansers.
Following treatment, patients should protect the area from sun exposure to reduce the risk of postinflammatory pigmentation.
Are there any side effects from KTP laser treatment?
Side effects from KTP laser treatment are usually minor and may include:
Redness and swelling – in rare instances soreness and redness may occur. Swelling is common especially on the upper cheeks and forehead and usually subsides in a few days. KTP laser is non-ablative treatment and there is usually no crusting or blistering
Changes in skin pigmentation – Sometimes the pigment cells (melanocytes) can be damaged leaving darker (hyperpigmentation) or paler (hypopigmentation) patches of skin. Generally, cosmetic lasers will work better on people with lighter than darker skin tones.
Bruising – rarely occurs.
Bacterial infection – antibiotics may be prescribed to treat wound infection if epidermal disruption occurs.
Scarring – is very rare and minor with KTP laser treatments.
Foerster V, Murtagh J, Fiander M. Pulsed dye laser therapy of port wine stains. Technology Report No. 78. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH); 2007.
Miller A. Treatment of erythematotelangiectactic rosacea with a KTP YAG laser. J Drugs Dermatol. 2005; 4(6):760–6. PubMed
Sadick N. An open-label, split-face study comparing the safety and efficacy of levulan kerastick (aminolevulonic acid) plus a 532 nm KTP laser to a 532 nm KTP laser alone for the treatment of moderate facial acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010; 9(3):229–23. PubMed
Batta K, Hindson C, Cotterill JA, et al. Treatment of poikiloderma of Civatte with the potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser. Br J Dermatol. 1999; 140(6):1191–2. PubMed
Bassichis BA, Swamy R, Dayan SH. Use of the KTP laser in the treatment of rosacea and solar lentigines. Facial Plast Surg. 2004 Feb; 20(1):77–83. PubMed
Baugh WP, Kucaba WD. Nonablative phototherapy for acne vulgaris using the KTP 532 nm laser. Dermatol Surg. 2005 Oct; 31(10):1290–6. PubMed
Apfelberg DB, Bailin P, Rosenberg H. Preliminary investigation of KTP/532 laser light in the treatment of hemangiomas and tattoos. Lasers Surg Med. 1986; 6(1):38-42, 56–7. PubMed
Tiffany Kwok, Jaggi Rao, Laser Management of Acne Scarring. Skin Therapy Letter. 2012; 17(2):4–6. PubMed
Collyer J, Boone SL, White LE, et al. Comparison of Treatment of Cherry Angiomata With Pulsed-Dye Laser, Potassium Titanyl Phosphate Laser, and Electrodesiccation Arch Dermatol. 2010; 146:33–7. PubMed
Lasers in dermatology
Laser Therapy – American Society for Dermatologic Surgery (ASDS)
Medscape Reference pages on lasers including KTP lasers:
Laser Treatment of Benign Pigmented Lesions
Complications of Dermatologic Laser Surgery
Laser Treatment of Acquired and Congenital Vascular Lesions
Laser Treatment of Benign Pigmented Lesions
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Laboratory Tests For Fungal Infection]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/laboratory-tests-for-fungal-infection]
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Laboratory tests for fungal infection
Laboratory tests for fungal infection — extra information
Infections, Diagnosis and testing
168373003, 27318003, 41170006, 395213003, 104189007
Diagnosis and testing
Laboratory tests for fungal infection
Last Reviewed: March, 2024
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand (2003); updated by Dr Ian Coulson, Dermatologist, United Kingdom (2024).
Edited by the DermNet content department.
Molecular biology techniques
Skin, hair and nail tissue are collected for microscopy and culture (mycology) to establish or confirm the diagnosis of a fungal infection.
Exposing the site to long-wavelength ultraviolet radiation (Wood lamp) can help identify some fungal infections of hair (tinea capitis) because the infected hair fluoresces green.
Specimen collection for fungal testing
Specimens for fungal microscopy and culture are transported to the laboratory in a sterile container or a black paper envelope. They include:
Scrapings of scale, best taken from the leading edge of the rash after the skin has been cleaned with alcohol
Skin stripped off with adhesive tape, which is then stuck on a glass slide
Hair which has been pulled out from the roots
Brushings from an area of scaling in the scalp
Nail clippings or skin scraped from under a nail
A moist swab from a mucosal surface (inside the mouth or vagina) in a special transport medium.
A swab should also be taken from pustules in case of secondary bacterial infection.
Direct microscopy of skin scrapings and nail clippings
The material is examined by microscopy by one or more of these methods:
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation, stained with blue or black ink
Fluorescent staining
An unstained wet-mount
A stained dried smear
Histopathology of biopsy with special stains, such as periodic acid-Schiff (PAS).
Microscopy can identify a dermatophyte by the presence of:
Fungal hyphae (branched filaments) making up a mycelium
Arthrospores (broken-off spores)
Arthroconidia (specialised external spores)
Spores inside a hair (endothrix) or outside a hair (ectothrix).
Fungal elements are sometimes difficult to find, especially if the tissue is very inflamed, so a negative result does not rule out fungal infection.
A yeast infection can be identified by the presence of:
Yeast cells, which may be dividing by budding
Pseudohyphae (branched filaments similar to those of a dermatophyte) forming a pseudomycelium.
PAS stain of aspergillus seen in a skin biopsy KOH of M. canis KOH of candida
Culture identifies which organism is responsible for the infection:
To find out the source of infection e.g. a particular animal
To select the most suitable treatment.
Growing the fungus in culture may take several weeks, incubated at 25–30ºC. The specimen is inoculated into a medium such as Sabouraud's dextrose agar containing cycloheximide and chloramphenicol. The cycloheximide is left out if a mould requires identification.
A negative culture may arise because:
The condition is not due to fungal infection.
The specimen was not collected properly.
Antifungal treatment had been used before the collection of the specimen.
There was a delay before the specimen reached the laboratory.
The laboratory procedures were incorrect.
The organism grows very slowly.
The culture of yeasts and moulds may be due to harmless colonisation rather than infection; this is common in an underlying skin disease such as psoriasis.
Trichophyton rubrum culture on agar slope
Blood tests for patients with deep or disseminated fungal infection
Blood tests are not useful for the diagnosis of superficial fungal infections. In subcutaneous and systemic mycoses, several tests may be helpful.
Antibodies (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis)
Antigen (cryptococcosis, aspergillosis, candidosis, histoplasmosis).
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Molecular testing by the PCR technique has become widespread in recent years and has a higher sensitivity than either culture or direct microscopy.
Results are often available in 24 hrs, and give fungal species identification that it useful both therapeutically and epidemiologically.
Paugam A, L'ollivier C, Viguié C, et al. Comparison of real-time PCR with conventional methods to detect dermatophytes in samples from patients with suspected dermatophytosis. J Microbiol Methods. 2013;95(2):218-222. Journal
Introduction to fungal infections
Skin manifestations of systemic mycoses
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Mycology specimen collection — Dr David Ellis [Youtube]
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lentigo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lentigo]
Lentigo: Causes, Features, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lentigo — extra information
Lesions (benign), Terminology
2F20.0Y, EJ20.1, DA00.2, ED61.Y
72100002, 403716006, 239136007, 398900000, 402624000, 18822004
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2006. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, February 2016.
A lentigo is a pigmented flat or slightly raised lesion with a clearly defined edge. Unlike an ephelis (freckle), it does not fade in the winter months. There are several kinds of lentigo.
The name lentigo originally referred to its appearance resembling a small lentil. The plural of lentigo is lentigines, although “lentigos” is also in common use.
Who gets lentigines?
Lentigines can affect males and females of all ages and races. Solar lentigines are especially prevalent in fair skinned adults. Lentigines associated with syndromes are present at birth or arise during childhood.
What causes lentigines?
Common forms of lentigo are due to exposure to ultraviolet radiation:
Sun damage including sunburn
Phototherapy, especially photochemotherapy (PUVA).
Ionising radiation, eg radiation therapy, can also cause lentigines.
Several familial syndromes associated with widespread lentigines originate from mutations in Ras-MAP kinase, mTOR signalling and PTEN pathways.
What are the clinical features of lentigines?
Lentigines have been classified into several different types depending on what they look like, where they appear on the body, causative factors, and whether they are associated to other diseases or conditions.
Lentigines may be solitary or more often, multiple. Most lentigines are smaller than 5 mm in diameter.
A precursor to junctional naevus
Arises during childhood and early adult life
Found on trunk and limbs
Small brown round or oval macule or thin plaque
Jagged or smooth edge
May have a dry surface
May disappear in time
Solar lentigo is regarded as a precursor to seborrhoeic keratosis
Found on chronically sun exposed sites such as hands, face, lower legs
May also follow sunburn to shoulders
Yellow, light or dark brown regular or irregular macule or thin plaque
May have a dry surface
Often has moth-eaten outline
Can slowly enlarge to several centimetres in diameter
May disappear, often through the process known as lichenoid keratosis
When atypical in appearance, may be difficult to distinguish from melanoma in situ
Also known as reticulated lentigo
Few in number compared to solar lentigines
Follows sunburn in very fair skinned individuals
Dark brown to black irregular ink spot-like macule
Similar to ink spot lentigo but follows photochemotherapy (PUVA)
Location anywhere exposed to PUVA
Similar to ink spot lentigo but follows indoor tanning
Location anywhere exposed to tanning bed
Occurs in site of irradiation (accidental or therapeutic)
Associated with late-stage radiation dermatitis: epidermal atrophy, subcutaneous fibrosis, keratosis, telangiectasias
Mucosal surfaces or adjacent glabrous skin eg lip, vulva, penis, anus
Also called mucosal melanosis
Generalised lentigines
Found on any exposed or covered site from early childhood
Small macules may merge to form larger patches
Not associated with a syndrome
Also called lentigines profusa, multiple lentigines
Agminated lentigines
Naevoid eruption of lentigos confined to a single segmental area
Sharp demarcation in midline
May have associated neurological and developmental abnormalities
Patterned lentigines
Inherited tendency to lentigines on face, lips, buttocks, palms, soles
Recognised mainly in people of African ethnicity
Centrofacial neurodysraphic lentiginosis
Associated with intellectual disability
Lentiginosis syndromes
Syndromes include LEOPARD/Noonan, Peutz-Jeghers, Laugier-Hunziker, Moynahan, Xeroderma pigmentosum, myxoma syndromes (LAMB, NAME, Carney), Ruvalcaba-Myhre-Smith, Bannayan-Zonnana syndrome, Cowden disease (multiple hamartoma syndrome )
Widespread lentigines present at birth or arise in early childhood
Associated with neural, endocrine, and mesenchymal tumours
How is the diagnosis made?
Lentigines are usually diagnosed clinically by their typical appearance. Concern regarding possibility of melanoma may lead to:
Diagnostic excision biopsy
Histopathology of a lentigo shows:
An increased number of melanocytes along the basal layer of epidermis
Unlike junctional melanocytic naevus, there are no nests of melanocytes
Increased melanin pigment within the keratinocytes
Additional features depending on type of lentigo
In contrast, an ephelis (freckle) shows sun-induced increased melanin within the keratinocytes, without an increase in number of cells.
What is the treatment for lentigines?
Most lentigines are left alone. Attempts to lighten them may not be successful. The following approaches are used:
SPF 50+ broad-spectrum sunscreen
Hydroquinone bleaching cream
Individual lesions can be permanently removed using:
Intense pulsed light
How can lentigines be prevented?
Lentigines associated with exposure ultraviolet radiation can be prevented by very careful sun protection. Clothing is more successful at preventing new lentigines than are sunscreens.
What is the outlook for lentigines?
Lentigines usually persist. They may increase in number with age and sun exposure. Some in sun-protected sites may fade and disappear.
Book: Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Fourth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Desai S, Hartman C, Grimes P, Shah S. Topical Stabilized Cysteamine as a New Treatment for Hyperpigmentation Disorders: Melasma, Post-Inflammatory Hyperpigmentation, and Lentigines. J Drugs Dermatol. 2021;20(12):1276-1279. doi:10.36849/jdd.6367 Journal
Lodish MB, Stratakis CA. The differential diagnosis of familial lentiginosis syndromes. Familial cancer. 2011;10(3):481–90. doi:10.1007/s10689-011-9446-x. PubMed
Atypical solar lentigo
Brown spots and freckles
Melanocytic naevus (moles)
Melanoma in skin of colour
Lentigo — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lentigo Maligna And Lentigo Maligna Melanoma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lentigo-maligna-and-lentigo-maligna-melanoma]
Lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma
Lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma — extra information
302836005, 302837001
Lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2011.
Treatment - lentigo maligna
Treatment - lentigo maligna melanoma
What is lentigo maligna?
Lentigo maligna is a precursor to lentigo maligna melanoma, a potentially serious form of skin cancer. Lentigo maligna is also known as Hutchinson melanotic freckle.
Lentigo maligna is an early form of melanoma in which the malignant cells are confined to the tissue of origin, the epidermis, hence it is often reported as ‘in situ’ melanoma. It occurs in sun damaged skin so is generally found on the face or neck, particularly the nose and cheek. It grows slowly in diameter over 5 to 20 years or longer.
Lentigo maligna melanoma is diagnosed when the melanoma cells have invaded into the dermis and deeper layers of skin. Lentigo maligna has a lower rate of transformation to invasive melanoma than the other forms of melanoma in situ (under 5% overall). However, the risk of invasive melanoma is greater in larger lesions, with up to 50% of those with diameter of greater than 4 cm being reported to have an invasive focus.
Management of melanoma is evolving. For up to date recommendations, refer to Australian Cancer Council Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of melanoma.
Who gets lentigo maligna?
The risk of lentigo maligna relates to sun damage. Thus lentigo maligna is more common in outdoor workers, in older people and in association with solar damage and keratinocyte skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma). Although often occurring in those with very fair skin (skin phototype 1 and 2), it may also occur in those who tan quite easily (phototype 3). It is rare in brown or black skin (phototype 4-6).
Lentigo maligna is more common in males than females. The majority of patients with lentigo maligna are older than 40 years, and the peak age of diagnosis is be between 60 and 80 years.
Unlike superficial spreading melanoma, lentigo maligna is not related to the number of melanocytic naevi (moles) or atypical naevi.
What does lentigo maligna look like?
Lentigo maligna presents as a slowly growing or changing patch of discoloured skin. At first, it often resembles common freckles or brown marks (lentigines). It becomes more distinctive and atypical in time, often growing to several centimetres over several years or even decades. Like other flat forms of melanoma, it can be recognised by the ABCDE rule: Asymmetry, Border irregularity, Colour variation, large Diameter and Evolving.
The characteristics of lentigo maligna include:
Large size: >6 mm and often several centimetres in diameter at diagnosis
Variable pigmentation – colours may include light brown or tan, dark brown, pink, red or white
Lentigo maligna Lentigo maligna Lentigo maligna
Thickening of part of the lesion
Increasing number of colours, especially blue or black
Ulceration or bleeding
Lentigo maligna Lentigo maligna Lentigo maligna
What is the cause of lentigo maligna?
Lentigo maligna is a proliferation of malignant pigment cells (melanocytes) along the basal layer of the epidermis and within the hair follicle. What triggers the cells to become malignant is unknown but genetic mutations may start within primitive stem cells.
Solar damage results in a degree of immune tolerance, allowing abnormal cells to grow unchecked.
What tests should be done if I have lentigo maligna?
It is essential to diagnose lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma accurately. Clinical diagnosis is aided by dermoscopy and in some centres, by confocal microscopy. New techniques are being evaluated to help identify the margin of lentigo maligna prior to excision biopsy.
Other tests are not necessary in the majority of patients but those with invasive melanoma that is more than 1 mm thick may be advised to have imaging studies, lymph node biopsy and blood tests.
New tests are being developed to determine specific genetic mutations with lentigo maligna melanoma, which may inform future targeted therapy.
Dermoscopy of lentigo maligna
Dermoscopy (also called dermatoscopy), or the use of a dermatoscope, by a dermatologist or other doctor trained in its use, can be very helpful in distinguishing lentigo maligna from other types of skin lesion. However, the dermoscopic appearance of early lentigo maligna can be difficult to distinguish from other pigmented lesions, particularly on the face.
Melanocytic naevi (moles)
Pigmented Actinic keratoses
Seborrhoeic keratoses
Facial pigmented lesions are characterised dermoscopically by pseudonetwork – this is pigmentation arising around prominent facial hair follicles, and several types of skin lesion may appear rather similar to lentigo maligna. However, lentigo maligna shows greater variation in the thickness of the lines making up the network, often forming an atypical rhomboid pattern associated with greyish dots, the structure tends to be irregular, and there is variation in colour.
Diagnostic excision biopsy of lesion suspicious of melanoma
If a skin lesion is clinically suspicious of lentigo maligna, it is best cut out (excision biopsy) with a 2–3 mm margin. Partial biopsy is less accurate than complete excision biopsy, as a single small biopsy could miss a malignant focus. However sometimes the lesion is very large, and before performing significant surgery, a partial biopsy is arranged to confirm the diagnosis. The doctor should remove a long ellipse of skin, take biopsies from multiple sites or carefully shave a representative area for histology.
The pathological diagnosis of melanoma and its precursors can be very difficult. Some lesions clinically typical of lentigo maligna are reported to show junctional melanocytic proliferation alone (with or without atypia), others have the criteria to diagnose in situ melanoma, and a few show invasive cancer.
Pathology report in melanoma
The pathologist's report should include a macroscopic description of the specimen and melanoma (the naked eye view), and a microscopic description. The following features should be reported if there is invasive melanoma.
Diagnosis of primary melanoma
Breslow thickness to the nearest 0.1 mm
Clark level of invasion
Margins of excision i.e. the normal tissue around the tumour
Mitotic rate – a measure of how fast the cells are proliferating
Whether or not there is ulceration
What is Breslow thickness?
The Breslow thickness is reported for invasive melanomas. It is measured vertically in millimetres from the top of the granular layer (or base of superficial ulceration) to the deepest point of tumour involvement. It is a strong predictor of outcome; the thicker the melanoma, the more likely it is to metastasise (spread).
What is the Clark level of invasion?
The Clark level indicates the anatomic plane of invasion.
Melanoma has invaded papillary dermis
Melanoma has filled papillary dermis
Melanoma has invaded reticular dermis
Melanoma has invaded subcutaneous tissue
The deeper the Clark level, the greater the risk of metastasis (secondary spread). It is useful in predicting outcome in thin tumours, and less useful for thicker ones in comparison to the value of the Breslow thickness.
What is the treatment for lentigo maligna?
Lentigo maligna has an unusually high risk of recurrence (up to 20%). For this reason, it is usually removed with a margin of healthy tissue, which can be difficult to achieve on facial skin. The ideal margin for all forms of melanoma in situ is 5-10mm, depending on how well defined are the edges of the lesion. Recommended margins for invasive melanoma are based on its thickness: it is 1 cm if less than 1 mm and 1-2 cm if the melanoma is over 1 mm in depth. If the margin and extent of the lentigo maligna is unclear, mapped serial excision may be recommended (margin-controlled, Mohs micrographic surgery or 'slow Mohs'), in an attempt to remove all the malignant cells and to spare healthy skin.Studies have shown improved disease-specific survival with Mohs surgery compared to wide local excision.
Other treatments for lentigo maligna may be considered if it is difficult to remove the lesion surgically, or surgery will be very deforming, or there is a major contraindication to surgery:
Radiotherapy — superficial X-rays or electrons
Cryotherapy — undertaken by an expert
Imiquimod cream — not yet fully evaluated.
However, these treatments do not offer as high cure rates as complete surgical excision.
Because the risk of invasive melanoma is small, one option in very elderly patients with large lentigo maligna is to simply photograph and watch the lesion carefully, biopsying any areas suspicious of invasive disease because of clinical or dermoscopic change.
What is the treatment for lentigo maligna melanoma?
Lentigo maligna melanoma should be completely removed surgically. If possible, there should be a 1 cm margin of normal skin around the tumour, but the margin may depend on the site of the lesion and how close it is to important structures like the mouth, eye or nose. If the local lymph nodes are enlarged due to melanoma, they should also be completely removed, which entails a major surgical procedure under general anaesthetic.
Melanoma staging means finding out if the melanoma has spread from its original site in the skin. Most melanoma specialists refer to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) cutaneous melanoma staging guidelines (2009). In essence, the stages are:
In situ melanoma including lentigo maligna
Thin melanoma 2 mm in thickness
Thick melanoma > 2 mm in thickness
Melanoma spread to involve local lymph nodes
Distant metastases have been detected
What is the outlook for patients with melanoma?
Lentigo maligna is not dangerous; it only becomes potentially life threatening if an invasive melanoma develops within it.
Long term follow-up involves reviewing the treated area and full skin examination to identify new lesions of concern. If the lesion was invasive, regional lymph nodes should also be examined. It may be prudent to biopsy any lesion arising within or close to the excision site.
The risk of spread (metastatic melanoma) from invasive melanoma depends on several factors, but the main one is the thickness of the melanoma at the time it was surgically removed.
Balch CM, et al. Final Version of 2009 AJCC Melanoma Staging and Classification. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 6199–206. PubMed Central
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Melanoma in Australia and New Zealand 2008. PDF. Available from: www.health.govt.nz/system/files/documents/publications/melanoma-guideline-nov08-v2.pdf [accessed 10 August 2020]
Ministry of Health. 2011. Cancer: New registrations and deaths 2008. Wellington: Ministry of Health. Available from: www.health.govt.nz/publication/cancer-new-registrations-and-deaths-2008 [accessed 10 August 2020]
O’Hern, K., & Demer, A. M. (2025). Surviving by a margin: Mohs outperforms wide local excision for lentigo maligna. British Journal of Dermatology, 192(2), 188–189. doi:10.1093/bjd/ljae422. Journal
Richardson A, Fletcher L, Sneyd M, Cox B, Reeder AI. The incidence and thickness of cutaneous malignant melanoma in New Zealand 1994–2004. NZ Med J 2008; 121: 1279. PubMed
Melanoma – pathology
Lentiginous melanoma
Superficial spreading melanoma
Acral lentiginous melanoma
Desmoplastic melanoma
Genetics of melanoma
Melanoma in skin of colour
Lentigo Maligna Melanoma — Medscape Reference
Malignant Melanoma — Medscape Reference
Cutaneous Melanoma — Medscape Reference
Melanoma — MedlinePlus
Melanoma New Zealand
Lentigo maligna and melanoma in situ — British Association of Dermatologists
Melanoma risk assessment tool — Melanoma Institute of Australia
Melanoma education — Melanoma Institute of Australia
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lichen Planopilaris]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lichen-planopilaris]
Lichen Planopilaris — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lichen planopilaris — extra information
Lichen planus follicularis, Follicular lichen planus, LPP
64540004, 718215008, 238655003, 717055000, 403325003
Author(s): Dr Delwyn Dyall-Smith FACD, Dermatologist, Australia, 2011. Updated: Dr Naya T. Hassan, Dermatology Resident, Syria. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. Updated May 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is lichen planopilaris?
Lichen planopilaris is an uncommon inflammatory condition that can lead to permanent hair loss.
The disease is considered to be a form of lichen planus which affects the hair follicles. It results in patchy, progressive, permanent hair loss mainly on the scalp, although other hair bearing skin (brows, pubic, and body) may be affected. Several forms are recognised:
Classic lichen planopilaris, also known as follicular lichen planus
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Graham Little syndrome.
Lichen planopilaris The atrophic scalp of a male patient with Graham-Little syndrome (LPP-patient2)Madarosis due to lichen planopilaris Clinical image of Graham-Little syndrome, presenting with alopecia of the forearm (LPP-patient2)
Who gets lichen planopilaris?
Lichen planopilaris usually affects young adult women, although the age range is wide and it can also affect men.
It commonly develops in association with lichen planus affecting the skin, mucosae, and nails.
Although lichen planopilaris is rare, it is one of the common causes of scarring hair loss of the scalp.
What causes lichen planopilaris?
The exact cause of lichen planopilaris is unknown. It is thought to be a cytotoxic autoimmune response to an unknown antigen located in hair follicles. The disease is rarely gene-related. It is also rarely drug-induced, eg, pembrolizumab.
What are the clinical features of lichen planopilaris?
Lichen planopilaris typically presents as smooth white patches of scalp hair loss. No hair follicle openings can be seen in the areas of hair loss. Scale and redness surround each hair follicle at the edges of these patches, which may be spiny on palpation. Hairs can be easily pulled out. It is multifocal and small areas may merge to form larger irregular areas.
Common sites of involvement are the sides, front, and lower back of the scalp.
Symptoms are often absent, but they may include:
Lichen planopilaris is usually slowly progressive.
Diffuse hair loss is uncommon.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
The clinical features do not vary in differing skin types.
What are the complications of lichen planopilaris?
Hair loss (alopecia)
Rarely eyelash and eyebrow loss
Psychological distress and reduced quality of life.
How is lichen planopilaris diagnosed?
Lichen planopilaris is suspected on the clinical presentation and careful examination of the mouth, nails, and skin for evidence of lichen planus elsewhere.
Trichoscopy reveals absent follicles, white dots, tubular perifollicular scale, and perifollicular erythema.
The diagnosis may be confirmed on scalp biopsy that includes hairs with surrounding redness and scale at the edge of an area of hair loss. Lichen planopilaris is an example of a primary lymphocytic folliculitis.
However, it is not always possible to make a diagnosis on biopsy. Where there is only patchy scarring, hair loss, and no evidence of inflammation, the diagnosis may not be able to be confirmed.
Dermoscopic image of lichen planopilaris presenting with irregularly distributed follicular openings (red arrows) denoting scarring (cicatricial) alopecia Dermoscopic image showing perifollicular scales (red circles, peritubular cast (black arrows) and blue grey dots (yellow circles) (LPP-patient1)Dermoscopic image of Graham-Little syndrome showing perifollicular scales of the scalp lesion denoting lichen planopilaris (LPP-patient2)
What is the differential diagnosis for lichen planopilaris?
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia (CCCA)
Folliculitis decalvans
Pseudopelade of Brocq
What is the treatment for lichen planopilaris?
Treatment should be sought and provided early, as no treatment restores hairs that have already been lost and replaced by scarring. The aim of treatment is to slow the progression of the disease and relieve symptoms. Hair loss may continue, although at a slower rate.
Anti-inflammatory treatment options include:
Corticosteroids — potent topical, intralesional, oral
Tetracycline e.g. doxycycline
Mycophenolate mofetil
Low dose oral minoxidil
Pioglitazone (an oral PPAR-γ agonist): variable efficacy; up to 50–70% of patients have reduced symptoms, inflammation, and disease progression
Platelet rich plasma
Adalimumab, a tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα) inhibitor, has also been reported to be effective in a few patients
Topical and oral JAK inhibitors (eg, topical ruxolitinib, oral tofacitinib) are under investigation.
Response to treatment is variable and some published studies contradict others as to their efficacy. The best patients can expect is to stop the progression of hair loss and to minimise scalp discomfort.
A management protocol as suggested by Svigos et al. (2021) includes:
Making a diagnosis of lichen planopilaris clinically, trichoscopically, and with a scalp biopsy.
The severity of symptoms, the extent of hair loss, and presence of disease activity are documented at each visit, approximately every 3 months.
Use potent or superpotent topical steroids, with topical minoxidil 5% and 0.3% tacrolimus.
Oral hydroxychloroquine (usually 200 mg twice daily) is started after appropriate laboratory tests and eye checks if the patient is symptomatic, has progressive hair loss, or signs of active disease.
Consider doxycycline orally if there is progression on hydroxychloroquine.
With further progression consider immunomodulation with methotrexate or ciclosporin.
Non-pharmacological measures
Camouflage with careful hair styling, hair colouring, and hairpieces such as wigs may be discussed with the patient.
Surgery such as scalp reduction and hair transplantation has been used for end-stage inactive disease with large areas of scarring but is not always successful. Risks of the Koebner phenomenon and reduced graft survival are experienced.
What is the outcome for lichen planopilaris?
The prognosis of the disease cannot be predicted. It may improve on its own after a period of time, or can get progressively worse. The main goal of treatment is to stop the hair loss, but the response to treatment also varies amongst patients.
Alam MS, LaBell B. Treatment of lichen planopilaris with adalimumab in a patient with hidradenitis suppurativa and rheumatoid arthritis. JAAD Case Reports 2020; 6(3): 219–21. Journal
Babahosseini H, Tavakolpour S, Mahmoudi H, et al. Lichen planopilaris: retrospective study on the characteristics and treatment of 291 patients. J Dermatolog Treat. 2019;30(6):598–604. Journal
Nic Dhonncha E, Foley CC, Markham T. The role of hydroxychloroquine in the treatment of lichen planopilaris: A retrospective case series and review. Dermatol Ther. 2017;30(3):10.1111. Journal
Cho BK, Sah D, Chwalek J, Roseborough I, Ochoa B, Chiang C, Price VH. Efficacy and safety of mycophenolate mofetil for lichen planopilaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 2010; 62: 393–7. PubMed
Mirmirani P, Karnik P. Lichen planopilaris treated with a peroxisome proliferator— activated receptor γ agonist. Arch Dermatol 2009; 145: 1363–6. PubMed
Singal A, Ong MM, Lipner SR. Gonadocorticoid exposure is associated with increased odds of lichen planopilaris and frontal fibrosing alopecia: A large retrospective cohort study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025;92(2):352-354. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2024.10.030. Pubmed
Svigos K, Yin L, Fried L, Lo Sicco K, Shapiro J. A Practical Approach to the Diagnosis and Management of Classic Lichen Planopilaris. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2021;22(5):681–92. doi:10.1007/s40257-021-00630-7. PubMed
Mesinkovska NA, Tellez A, Dawes D, Piliang M, Bergfeld W. The use of oral pioglitazone in the treatment of lichen planopilaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 2015; 72:355–6. Journal
Spring P, et al. Lichen planopilaris treated by the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ agonist pioglitazone: Lack of lasting improvement or cure in the majority of patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013; 69;830–2. PubMed
Williams, K. N., Perez, S. M., Burroway, B., & Tosti, A. (2025). Topical ruxolitinib in the management of frontal fibrosing alopecia and/or lichen planopilaris: A single-center retrospective cohort study. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 92(1), 170–172. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2024.09.032. Journal
Yang CC, Khanna T, Sallee B, Christiano AM, Bordone LA. Tofacitinib for the treatment of lichen planopilaris: A case series. Dermatol Ther. 2018;31(6):e12656. PubMed Central
Graham Little syndrome
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Pseudopelade of Brocq
Psychological effects of hair loss
Lichen planopilaris — British Association of Dermatologists patient information
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lichen Sclerosus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lichen-sclerosus]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lichen sclerosus — extra information
Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus, White spot disease
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
EB60, EB60.0, EB60.1, EB60.Y
25674000, 402423004, 238932004, 198033005, 26348009, 402424005, 403566002, 238933009, 403890009
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Website Manager, Chief Editor, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated January 2016.
What is lichen sclerosus?
Lichen sclerosus is a common chronic inflammatory skin disorder that most often affects genital and perianal areas.
Older names for lichen sclerosus include lichen sclerosus et atrophicus, kraurosis vulvae (in women), and balanitis xerotica obliterans (in males).
Who gets lichen sclerosus?
Lichen sclerosus can start at any age, although it is most often diagnosed in women over 50. Pre-pubertal children can also be affected.
Lichen sclerosus is ten times more common in women than in men. [see Lichen sclerosus in men]
15% of patients know of a family member with lichen sclerosus.
It may follow or co-exist with another skin condition, most often lichen simplex, psoriasis, erosive lichen planus, vitiligo, or morphoea.
What causes lichen sclerosus?
The cause of lichen sclerosus is not fully understood and may include genetic, hormonal, irritant, traumatic, and infectious components.
Lichen sclerosus is often classified as an autoimmune disease. Autoimmune diseases are associated with antibodies to a specific protein.
Extracellular matrix protein-1 (ECM-1) antibodies have been detected in 60–80% of women with vulval lichen sclerosus.
However, these antibodies could be epigenetic, ie, the results of disease rather than the cause of disease.
Male genital lichen sclerosus is rare in men circumcised in infancy. It has been suggested that it may be caused by chronic, intermittent damage by urine occluded under the foreskin.
As onset in women is commonly postmenopausal, a relative lack of oestrogen may be significant.
What are the clinical features of lichen sclerosus?
Lichen sclerosus presents as white crinkled or thickened patches of skin that tend to scar.
Vulval lichen sclerosus
Lichen sclerosus primarily involves the non-hair bearing, inner areas of the vulva.
It can be localised to one small area or extensively involve perineum, labia minora (inner lips) and clitoral hood.
It can spread onto the surrounding skin of the labia majora and inguinal fold and, in 50% of women, to the anal and perianal skin.
Lichen sclerosus never involves vaginal mucosa.
Lichen sclerosus can be extremely itchy and sore (see Pruritus vulvae).
Sometimes bruises, blood blisters and ulcers appear after scratching, or from minimal friction (eg, tight clothing, sitting down).
Urine can sting and irritate.
Sexual intercourse can be very uncomfortable and may result in painful fissuring of the posterior fourchette at the entrance to the vagina.
It may cause discomfort or bleeding when passing bowel motions, and aggravate any tendency to constipation, particularly in children.
Lichen sclerosus causes adhesions and scarring.
The clitoris may be buried.
The labia minora resorb/shrink.
The entrance to the vagina tightens (introital stenosis).
Penile lichen sclerosus
In men, lichen sclerosus usually affects the tip of the penis (glans), which becomes white, firm and scarred. [see Lichen sclerosus in men]
The urethra may narrow (meatal stenosis), resulting in a thin or crooked urinary stream.
The foreskin may become difficult to retract (phimosis).
Sexual function may be affected, because of painful erections or embarrassment.
Extragenital lichen sclerosus
Extragenital lichen sclerosus refers to lichen sclerosus at other sites.
Extragenital lichen sclerosus affects 10% of women with the vulval disease.
Only 6% of men and women with extragenital lichen sclerosus do not have genital lichen sclerosus at the time of diagnosis.
One or more white dry plaques may be found on the inner thigh, buttocks, lower back, abdomen, under the breasts, neck, shoulders, and armpits.
Lichen sclerosus resembles cigarette paper, as the skin is dry, wrinkled and thin (atrophic).
Hair follicles may appear prominent, containing dry plugs of keratin.
Bruises, blisters and ulcers may appear without noticeable trauma.
Axillary lichen sclerosus
What are the complications of lichen sclerosus?
Patients with lichen sclerosus may develop infections, particularly Candida albicans, herpes simplex, Staphylococcus aureus. Herpes infections are particularly painful and may cause vulval ulceration.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lichen sclerosus of anogenital sites is associated with an increased risk of vulval, penile or anal cancer (squamous cell carcinoma, SCC).
Cancer is estimated to affect up to 5% of patients with vulval lichen sclerosus.
Cancer is more likely if the inflammatory disease is uncontrolled.
Invasive SCC presents as an enlarging lump or a sore that fails to heal.
High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions in females (SIL) or males associated with lichen sclerosus may be HPV-associated (usual type) or differentiated.
Extragenital lichen sclerosus does not appear to predispose to cancer.
How is lichen sclerosus diagnosed?
An experienced clinician can often diagnose lichen sclerosus by its appearance. Dermoscopy can provide further clues. Skin biopsy is frequently recommended.
Histopathology may confirm the suspected diagnosis of lichen sclerosus.
Another skin condition may be diagnosed or coexist with lichen sclerosus.
A focal area may undergo a biopsy to assess for cancer or SIL.
A biopsy may also be recommended at follow-up, to evaluate areas of concern or to explain the inadequate response to treatment.
What is the treatment for lichen sclerosus?
Patients with lichen sclerosus are best to consult a doctor with a particular interest in the condition for accurate diagnosis and treatment recommendations.
They are advised to become familiar with the location and appearance of their lichen sclerosus.
Women may use a mirror when applying topical therapy.
Photographs may help in monitoring activity and treatment.
General measures for genital lichen sclerosus
Wash gently once or twice daily.
Use a non-soap cleanser, if any.
Try to avoid tight clothing, rubbing and scratching.
Activities such as riding a bicycle or horse may aggravate symptoms.
If incontinent, seek medical advice and treatment.
Topical steroid ointment
Topical steroids are the primary treatment for lichen sclerosus. An ultrapotent topical steroid is often prescribed (eg, clobetasol propionate 0.05%). A potent topical steroid (eg, mometasone furoate 0.1% ointment) may also be used in mild disease or when symptoms are controlled.
A thin smear should be precisely applied to the white plaques and rubbed in gently.
Most patients will be told to apply the steroid ointment once a day. After one to three months (depending on the severity of the disease), the ointment can be used less often.
Topical steroid may need to be continued once or twice a week to control symptoms or to prevent lichen sclerosus recurring.
Itch often settles within a few days, but it may take weeks to months for the skin to return to normal (if at all).
One 30-g tube of topical steroid should last 3 to 6 months or longer.
The doctor should reassess the treated area after a few weeks, as a response to treatment is quite variable.
Topical steroids are safe when used appropriately. However, excessive use or application to the wrong site can result in adverse effects. In anogenital areas, these include:
Periorificial dermatitis
Candida albicans infection (eg, vulvovaginal thrush)
It is most important to follow instructions carefully and to attend follow-up appointments regularly.
Other topical therapy
Other topical treatments used in patients with lichen sclerosus include:
Intravaginal oestrogen cream or pessaries in postmenopausal women. These reduce symptoms due to atrophic vulvovaginitis (dry, thin, fissured and sensitive vulval and vaginal tissues due to hormonal deficiency).
Topical calcineurin inhibitors tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus cream instead of or in addition to topical steroids. They tend to cause burning discomfort (at least for the first few days). Early concern that these medications may have the potential to accelerate cancer growth in the presence of oncogenic human papillomavirus (the cause of genital warts) appears unfounded.
Topical retinoid (eg, tretinoin cream) is not well tolerated on genital skin but may be applied to other sites affected by lichen sclerosus. It reduces scaling and dryness.
When lichen sclerosus is severe, acute, and not responding to topical therapy, systemic treatment may rarely be prescribed. Options include:
Intralesional or systemic corticosteroids
Oral retinoids: acitretin, isotretinoin
Surgery is essential for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions or cancer.
In males, circumcision is effective in lichen sclerosus affecting prepuce and glans of the penis. It is best done early if initial topical steroids have not controlled symptoms and signs. If the urethra is stenosed or scarred, reconstructive surgery may be necessary.
In females, the release of vulval and vaginal adhesions and scarring from vulval lichen sclerosus may occasionally be performed to reduce urination difficulties and allow intercourse if dilators have not proved effective. Procedures include:
Simple perineotomy (a division of adhesions)
Fenton procedure (an incision that is repaired transversely)
Perineoplasty (excision of involved tissue and vaginal mucosal advancement)
Unfortunately, lichen sclerosus sometimes closes up the vaginal opening again after surgery has initially appeared successful. It can be repeated.
Other reported treatments for lichen sclerosus are considered experimental at this time.
CO2 laser ablation of hyperkeratotic plaques
Photodynamic therapy
Stem cell and platelet-rich plasma injections
What is the outlook for lichen sclerosus?
Lichen sclerosus is a chronic disease and usually persists for years.
Extragenital lichen sclerosus is more likely than anogenital disease to clear.
Early treatment occasionally leads to complete and long-term remission.
Scarring is permanent.
Long-term follow-up is recommended to monitor the disease, optimise treatment and ensure early diagnosis of cancer.
Bunker CB, Shim TN. Male genital lichen sclerosus. Indian J Dermatol. 2015 Mar-Apr;60(2):111-17. doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.152501. Review. PubMed PMID: 25814697; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4372901.
Casabona F, Priano V, Vallerino V, Cogliandro A, Lavagnino G. New surgical approach to lichen sclerosus of the vulva: the role of adipose-derived mesenchymal cells and platelet-rich plasma in tissue regeneration.  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. 126(4):210e-11e. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3181ea9386 Journal
Neill SM, Lewis FM, Tatnall FM, Cox NH; British Association of Dermatologists. British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the management of lichen sclerosus 2010. Br J Dermatol. 2010;163(4):672-82. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09997.x PubMed
Kirtschig G, Becker K, Günthert A, et al. Evidence-based (S3) Guideline on (anogenital) Lichen sclerosus. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(10):e1-e43. doi:10.1111/jdv.13136 Journal
Gómez-Frieiro M, Laynez-Herrero E. Use of Er:YAG laser in the treatment of vulvar lichen sclerosus. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2019;5(5):340-4. doi:10.1016/j.ijwd.2019.05.007 Journal
Kirtschig G. Lichen sclerosus-presentation, diagnosis and management. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2016;113(19):337-43. doi:10.3238/arztebl.2016.0337 Journal
Orszulak D, Dulska A, Niziński K, et al. Pediatric vulvar lichen sclerosus-a review of the literature. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18(13):7153.  doi:10.3390/ijerph18137153 Journal
Chi CC, Kirtschig G, Baldo M, Brackenbury F, Lewis F, Wojnarowska F. Topical interventions for genital lichen sclerosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;2011(12):CD008240. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008240.pub2. PubMed
Lichen sclerosus in men
Lichen sclerosus pathology
Dermoscopy of lichen sclerosus
Genital skin conditions
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (SIL, VIN)
Erosive lichen planus
ISSVD Vulvovaginal Disorders: an algorithm for basic adult diagnosis and treatment
Vulvovaginal Disorders: A Pathway to Diagnosis and Treatment
Lichen Sclerosus (females) — British Association of Dermatologists
Lichen Sclerosus (males) — British Association of Dermatologists
Worldwide Lichen Sclerosus Support
Supportgroep and Stichting Lichen Sclerosus Nederland
Scratch Sclerosus quartet game, in Dutch, but soon to be made available in English
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lichen Simplex]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lichen-simplex]
Lichen simplex chronicus (Neurodermatitis) - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lichen simplex — extra information
Neurodermatitis, Lichenified dermatitis, Lichenified eczema, Lichen simplex chronicus
EA83, EA83.02, EA83.0Y, EA83.0Z
Author: Patrick Ireland, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. February 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is lichen simplex?
Lichen simplex is a chronic itchy skin disorder characterised by well demarcated, erythematous patches, and plaques of thickened leathery skin.
Erythema may be variable, and lesions may be solitary or multiple. Lichen simplex is also known as neurodermatitis, lichen simplex chronicus, and neurodermatitis circumscripta.
Localised lichen simplex on the lateral shin - a common area for this disorder Lichen simplex on the ankles - accentuated skin markings, scale and pigmentation in skin of colour Lichen simplex
Who gets lichen simplex?
The exact prevalence of lichen simplex chronicus is unknown, but it is relatively common and has a female preponderance with a ratio of 2:1. It most commonly occurs in mid-late adulthood, with the highest frequency in people aged 30–50 years.
Race does not appear to affect the prevalence of lichen simplex. Lichen simplex can occur in individuals with no general or other skin problems, but can occur in patients who have comorbid psychiatric conditions, primary pruritic dermatoses (particularly atopic eczema), and systemic diseases associated with pruritus.
What causes lichen simplex?
Lichen simplex results from a chronic ‘itch-scratch cycle’; following repetitive excoriation and scratching, well circumscribed thickened patches develop. The inciting stimulus for the itch can be due to a variety of reasons:
Primary lichen simplex develops on normal skin
Secondary lichen simplex can follow an underlying itchy dermatosis — atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, scabies, xerosis
Neural-mediated stimulus that triggers itch — brachioradial pruritus, radiculopathy
Systemic disease associated with pruritus — uraemia, polycythaemia vera, malignancy
Environmental triggers — heat, sweat, chemical irritants, insect bite.
What are the clinical features of lichen simplex?
Lichen simplex chronicus consists of one or more lichenified patches or plaques on the skin. Lichenification that results from the chronic itching and scratching cycle causes an exaggeration of the normal skin marking creases giving a ‘criss-cross’ pattern. Other clinical features may include:
Hyper- or hypopigmentation (particularly in those with darker skin colour)
Broken hairs (the brush sign), or alopecia in affected areas.
Lichen simplex can present with single or multiple lesions, often in areas that are easy to reach. They most commonly involve the:
Vulva, pubis, and scrotum
Wrists and extensor forearms
Ankles, anterolateral shins, and thighs.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Pigmentary changes, such as hyper- or hypopigmentation, are more commonly seen in patients with darker skin types; erythema is much less obvious.
What are the complications of lichen simplex?
Hyper- or hypopigmentation
Scarring and fibrosis
Anxiety and psychiatric related comorbidities
Adverse effects of medications used to treat the condition (systemic and topical corticosteroids).
How is lichen simplex diagnosed?
The diagnosis of lichen simplex chronicus is largely clinical. Investigations are performed to exclude other differential diagnosis:
Fungal culture — used to investigate underlying dermatophyte or candida infection.
In order to investigate underlying conditions predisposing itch, serum TSH, free T4, EUC, LFTs, FBC, imaging, and other investigations may be undertaken.
What is the differential diagnosis for lichen simplex?
The following conditions should be excluded when evaluating patients with lichen simplex:
Superficial basal cell carcinoma, in situ squamous cell carcinoma.
Additionally, further differentials need to be considered based on the distribution disease. For example:
Extramammary Paget disease
What is the treatment for lichen simplex?
The treatment of lichen simplex can be summarised into a few key areas:
Breaking the itch-scratch cycle
Applications and procedures.
Physical barriers and bandaging to reduce subconscious scratching.
Reduce stress, keep nails short, wear loose-fitting clothing.
Avoid and/or address triggers.
Treatment of the underlying systemic condition, dermatosis, or psychiatric disorder.
Emollients — aim for use at least twice daily; best applied after showering to retain moisture.
First-generation sedating antihistamines (e.g. phenhydramine or chlorpheniramine) for those with disruptive night-time pruritus.
Topical corticosteroids — superpotent topical corticosteroids 1–2x daily with either paste bandage or hydrocolloid occlusion for up to 4 weeks. Alternatively, a steroid impregnated tape may be used. Weaker steroids can be used in sensitive thin skin areas.
Intralesional steroids can be used for refractory lesions.
Coal tar preparations.
Topical antipruritics — capsaicin or doxepin cream.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors — tacrolimus ointment or pimecrolimus cream
Amitriptyline, gabapentin, or pregabalin
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
Surgical excision — may be indicated for nodular isolated lesions
Habit reversal techniques
Systemic immunosuppressants, IL-4/IL-13 inhibitors, and JAK inhibitors are reported to be effective but seldom required.
What is the outcome for lichen simplex?
Lichen simplex is a chronic skin condition (hence lichen simplex chronicus). Whilst it can clear completely, it is often persistent and prone to recurrence. Treatment of the underlying condition predisposing to itch is essential to reduce recurrence in lichen simplex.
Often patients find no reprieve from lichen simplex without targeted pharmacotherapy (e.g. topical corticosteroids).
Charifa A, Badri T, Harris BW. Lichen Simplex Chronicus. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; August 11, 2021. eBook
Ju T, Vander Does A, Mohsin N, Yosipovitch G. Lichen Simplex Chronicus Itch: An Update. Acta Derm Venereol. 2022;102:adv00796. Published 2022 Oct 19. doi:10.2340/actadv.v102.4367 Journal
Juarez MC, Kwatra SG. A systematic review of evidence based treatments for lichen simplex chronicus. J Dermatolog Treat. 2021;32(7):684–92. doi:10.1080/09546634.2019.1708856. Journal
Liao YH, Lin CC, Tsai PP, Shen WC, Sung FC, Kao CH. Increased risk of lichen simplex chronicus in people with anxiety disorder: a nationwide population-based retrospective cohort study. Br J Dermatol. 2014;170(4):890–4. doi:10.1111/bjd.12811. Journal
Lichen simplex of the scrotum
Lichen simplex of the vulva
Pigmentation disorders
Emollients and moisturisers
Neurodermatitis — American Academy of Dermatology
Lichen simplex chronicus — Medscape
Steroid impregnated tape — YouTube: demonstrating tape application
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lichenoid Keratosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lichenoid-keratosis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lichenoid keratosis — extra information
Lichen planus-like keratosis, LPLK, Benign lichenoid keratosis, BLK, Solitary lichen planus, Involuting lichenoid plaque
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2006. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, March 2016. DermNet Revision September 2021
What is lichenoid keratosis?
Lichenoid keratosis is a small, inflamed macule or thin pigmented plaque, usually solitary, with a lichenoid tissue reaction on histology.
Lichenoid keratosis is also known as benign lichenoid keratosis, solitary lichen planus, lichen planus-like keratosis and involuting lichenoid plaque. It is one of the causes of atypical solar lentigo.
Who gets lichenoid keratosis?
Lichenoid keratosis generally develops in fair-skinned patients aged 30–80 years. It is twice as common in females as than males. It is most commonly seen in Caucasians and rarely affects Asians, African Americans, or Hispanics.
What causes lichenoid keratosis?
Lichenoid keratosis is an inflammatory reaction arising in a regressing existing solar lentigo or seborrhoeic keratosis. It is not known what causes the reaction, but triggers can include minor trauma such as friction, drugs, dermatitis, and sun exposure.
What are the clinical features of lichenoid keratosis?
It is most commonly found on the upper trunk, followed by the distal upper extremities, and less commonly on the head and neck.
Size ranges from a few millimetres to one centimetre or more in size.
The skin surface may be smooth, scaly, or warty.
The lesion is often asymptomatic. It may be itchy or have a mild stinging sensation.
The clinical features of lichenoid keratosis vary depending on the inflammatory stage of the lesion.
Classic, bullous, or atypical subtype
Acute rapidly developing lesion (present for 3 months)
Erythematous or pinkish papule or plaque
Dermoscopy may show remnants of pigment network, subtle blotches of brown colour, clusters of grey dots plus dotted, irregular linear and other shaped telangiectatic blood vessels
Classic variant shows epidermal acanthosis with a band-like lichenoid lymphocytic infiltrate. Presence of epidermal parakeratosis distinguishes these lesions from typical lichen planus.
Bullous variant shows intraepidermal or subepidermal bullous cavities with dense lymphocytic infiltrate and increased number of necrotic basilar layer keratinocytes.
Atypical variant shows similar histology to classic type with scattered enlarged CD-3, CD-30 (+) lymphocytes with hyperchromatic, irregular nuclei.
Early or interface subtype
Subacute lesions present for 3 months to one year
Erythematous to dusky-red or hyperpigmented brown lesion
Depending on the age of lesion, dermoscopy may show features of a solar lentigo or flat seborrhoeic keratosis with moth-eaten borders, fingerprinting, milia-like cysts, comedo-like openings, plus small foci of melanophages (grey dots).
Single lymphocytes aligned along the dermoepidermal junction without epidermal acanthosis and adjacent lentigo
Late regressed or atrophic subtype
Lesions have been present for more than one year
May be violaceous papules or irregularly distributed lesions with shades of brown or grey
Epidermal atrophy with papillary dermal scarring, patchy lymphocytic infiltrates and melanin incontinence
Multiple eruptive lichenoid keratoses in sun-exposed sites are also described. Their colour varies from an initial reddish brown to a greyish purple/brown as the lesion resolves several weeks or months later.
How is lichenoid keratosis diagnosed?
Lichenoid keratosis may be diagnosed clinically and confirmed on dermoscopy which reveals uniform clusters of grey dots [see Annular granular pattern dermoscopy]. Depending on the stage of the lesion, there may be signs of an original pre-existing lentigo or seborrhoeic keratosis which disappear with time. Later on the grey dots also disappear, as the lesion resolves.
A skin biopsy is required if clinical examination and dermoscopy cannot differentiate between lichenoid keratosis and other solitary erythematous lesions.
Histopathology resembles lichen planus or lichenoid drug eruption, with some slight differences. Remnants of the original solar lentigo or seborrhoeic keratosis may be evident.
Grey dots Annular granular pattern Grey dots
What is the treatment of lichenoid keratosis?
Lichenoid keratosis can be removed if desired by liquid nitrogen, electrosurgery or curettage.
Multiple eruptive lichenoid keratoses may be effectively treated with the oral retinoid, acitretin.
What is the outcome for lichenoid keratosis?
Lichenoid keratosis is harmless and resolves spontaneously.
To date there have been no reports of lichenoid keratosis turning into malignant skin tumours.
BinJadeed H, Aljomah N, Alsubait N, Alsaif F, AlHumidi A. Lichenoid keratosis successfully treated with topical imiquimod. JAAD Case Rep. 2020;6(12):1353–5. doi:10.1016/j.jdcr.2020.10.002. PubMed Central
Gori A, Oranges T, Janowska A, et al. Clinical and dermoscopic features of lichenoid keratosis: a retrospective case study. J Cutan Med Surg. 2018;22(6):561–6. doi:10.1177/1203475418786213. PubMed
Maor D, Ondhia C, Yu LL, Chan JJ. Lichenoid keratosis is frequently misdiagnosed as basal cell carcinoma. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2017;42(6):663–6. doi:10.1111/ced.13178. PubMed
Pitney L, Weedon D, Pitney M. Multiple lichen planus-like keratoses: lichenoid drug eruption simulant and under-recognised cause of pruritic eruptions in the elderly. Australas J Dermatol. 2016 Feb;57(1):54–6. doi: 10.1111/ajd.12288. PubMed
Lichenoid drug eruption
Atypical solar lentigo
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lip Lickers Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lip-lickers-dermatitis]
Lip licker’s dermatitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lip licker’s dermatitis
Lip licker’s dermatitis — extra information
402285007, 238583005
Lip licker’s dermatitis
Authors: Dr Chioma Enweasor, Clinical Fellow, Department of Rheumatology/Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of California, Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA, USA; and Dr Sean Deane, Senior Physician, Allergy and Immunology, The Permanente Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, USA. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Mary-Elaine Luther/Gus Mitchell. January 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is lip licker's dermatitis?
How do you get lip licker's dermatitis?
Lip licker’s dermatitis is commonly seen in school-aged children, although it may present at any age [2,3]. In some patients, difficulty with impulse control or cognitive impairment contributes to compulsive lip-licking [4,5].
How does lip-licking cause dermatitis?
Lip-licking may begin with or without an initial stimulus, such as chapping in cold, dry weather.
The patient engages in constant — often unconscious — lip-licking, rewetting the skin with saliva.
The constant wet-dry cycle of saliva due to repeated lip-licking disrupts the normal skin barrier function and causes inflammation.
Ongoing inflammation drives further lip-licking, perpetuating the cycle [1,3].
Lip licker's dermatitis — the tongue is the cause
What are the clinical features of lip licker's dermatitis?
Lip-licking creates chronic redness, dryness, and scaling of the lips and surrounding skin typically in a distribution that corresponds to the reach of the patient’s tongue.
The area of inflammation frequently crosses the vermilion border of the lip.
Symptoms can worsen during winter.
The patient often complains of burning and dryness [1–3].
Lip licker's dermatitis
What are the complications of lip licker's dermatitis?
Although lip-licking might seem like a benign habit, there are significant possible complications.
Skin breakdown can lead to a secondary bacterial skin infection (usually Staphylococcus aureus) or yeast infection (Candida albicans).
Chronic inflammation may result in long-term postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation [4].
How is lip licker's dermatitis diagnosed?
Lip licker’s dermatitis is usually diagnosed clinically, based on the characteristic appearance. Lip-licking may be observed during the evaluation, but direct observation is not required.
Skin biopsy is generally not indicated [3].
What is the differential diagnosis for lip licker's dermatitis?
Conditions that are often confused with lip licker's dermatitis include:
Periorificial dermatitis — this does not involve the vermilion of the lip or the skin immediately adjacent to the lip and generally causes papules.
What is the treatment for lip licker's dermatitis?
Behaviour modification to reduce lip-licking is essential. Treatment may include:
Mild to moderate-strength topical corticosteroid (eg, hydrocortisone ointment)
A topical calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus ointment or pimecrolimus cream).
What is the likely outcome for lip licker's dermatitis?
Lip licker’s dermatitis often resolves with appropriate treatment but may recur or require long-term treatment if lip-licking behaviour cannot be corrected [5].
Hisa T, Hamada T, Hirachi Y, Yoshioka M, Takigawa M, Shigenaga Y. Senile lip licking. Dermatology. 1995;191(4):339–40. doi:10.1159/000246591. PubMed
Harth W, Gieler U, Kusnir D, Tausk FA. Clinical Management in Psychodermatology. New York: Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
Eczematous cheilitis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Lipodermatosclerosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/lipodermatosclerosis]
Lipodermatosclerosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Lipodermatosclerosis
Lipodermatosclerosis — extra information
Hypodermitis sclerodermiformis, Sclerosing panniculitis
410016009, 762536003, 234050002, 95336007, 95337003
Lipodermatosclerosis
Author: Dr Millicent Osti, Resident Medical Officer, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; A/Prof Rosemary Nixon, Dermatologist, East Melbourne Dermatology, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. October 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is lipodermatosclerosis?
Lipodermatosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory condition characterised by subcutaneous fibrosis and hardening of the skin on the lower legs.
Lipodermatosclerosis is also known as sclerosing panniculitis and hypodermitis sclerodermaformis.
Who gets lipodermatosclerosis?
Lipodermatosclerosis is common, affecting middle-aged or older people. It is more common in women and is associated with immobility and a high body mass index (obesity) [1].
What causes lipodermatosclerosis?
Lipodermatosclerosis is an inflammatory skin condition resulting from underlying venous insufficiency. This is caused by:
Incompetent venous valves
Venous outflow obstruction
Dysfunction of the calf muscle pump [2].
The resulting venous hypertension causes an increase of leukocytes within the veins, which then migrate into surrounding tissue. The leukocytes become activated, attracting and releasing proinflammatory cells and cytokines, inducing a chronic inflammatory state. Increased collagen production leads to the fibrosis of subcutaneous fat [2].
What are the clinical features of lipodermatosclerosis?
Acute lipodermatosclerosis may mimic cellulitis, with induration, erythema, pain, itch, aching, and a feeling of swelling or heaviness in one or, more often, both lower limbs [2].
In the acute phase, signs may be localised to a single plaque but are usually more widespread. The most commonly affected areas are the pretibial or medial aspect of the leg.
Acute lipodermatosclerosis Acute lipodermatosclerosis Acute lipodermatosclerosis
Induration, erythema, and pain continue in the chronic phase of lipodermatosclerosis. Subcutaneous fibrosis may result in significant narrowing of the distal lower limb, causing the leg to have an ‘upside-down champagne bottle’ appearance [1,2].
Other clinical features of chronic venous insufficiency may be present, including hyperpigmentation of the skin from haemosiderin deposition, atrophie blanche, varicose veins, venous eczema, and venous ulcers.
Lipodermatosclerosis Lipodermatosclerosis Lipodermatosclerosis
What are the complications of lipodermatosclerosis?
Lipodermatosclerosis is associated with poor wound healing because of the chronic inflammatory state and fibrosis. Venous ulcers commonly co-exist and may be difficult to treat.
How is lipodermatosclerosis diagnosed?
Lipodermatosclerosis is usually diagnosed clinically. Underlying venous insufficiency may be confirmed using Doppler studies.
A biopsy is helpful but should be performed with caution because of the likelihood of poor wound healing [3]. Any biopsy also needs to include the panniculus. The characteristic features seen upon biopsy are dependent on the stage of disease but include subcutaneous lobular and septal changes including:
Pseudocyst formation
Lipomembranous (fatty tissue) change
Macrophage collections forming lipogranulomas (a nodule of inflamed fat cells around a foreign body)
Iron deposition [4,5].
What is the differential diagnosis for lipodermatosclerosis?
Differential diagnoses for lipodermatosclerosis can include:
Other causes of panniculitis
Morphoea (localised scleroderma)
Cutaneous vasculitis
Necrobiosis lipoidica.
What is the treatment for lipodermatosclerosis?
Physical activity (walking) should be encouraged to increase the functionality of the calf muscle pump. Weight reduction is effective if obesity is a factor.
Compression therapy and elevation
Mechanical compression therapy using compression stockings or socks is the mainstay of treatment, encouraging venous return and assisting with symptom control, but may be poorly tolerated in some individuals.
Elevation of the legs can help reduce oedema and pain.
Stanozolol can be effective for pain relief and has also shown to reduce dermal thickness [6].
Oxandralone — another anabolic steroid with less hepatic risk.
Pentoxifylline has been shown to be useful in venous ulcers in conjunction with compression or in patients who cannot tolerate compression.
Combination therapy with hydroxychloroquine may reduce symptoms that are refractory to other treatments [7,8].
Intralesional steroid injection of triamcinolone has proven to be effective at alleviating symptoms [9].
Tetracyclines, such as doxycycline or minocycline, have anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic properties that may provide benefit [10–12].
Phlebotonic drugs that modify the tone of the vein wall, including diosmin, hydroxyethylrutoside, or horse chestnut seed extract (escin), may reduce oedema and other symptoms [13].
Ultrasound therapy may offer symptomatic benefit, relief of erythema, hardness and pain [14, 15].
Ultraviolet radiation (UVA1) has been reported to be effective [16].
Emollients and topical steroids are useful in the management of associated venous eczema.
Treatment of underlying venous insufficiency can improve symptoms and may reduce the risk of ulcer recurrence. Referral to a vascular surgeon should be considered. Leg vein therapies include:
Endovenous ablation by laser, radiofrequency (RF) catheter, steam, cyanoacrylate and mechanical occlusion with chemical assistance (MOCA)
What is the outcome for lipodermatosclerosis?
Venous insufficiency is a progressive disease. Although treatment can improve symptoms or slow progression, its associated conditions such as lipodermatosclerosis are usually chronic and recurring.
Bergan JJ, Schmid-Schonbein GW, Smith PD, Nicolaides AN, Boisseau MR, Eklof B. Chronic venous disease. N Engl J Med 2006; 355: 488–98. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra055289. PubMed
Kirsner RS, Pardes JB, Eaglstein WH, Falanga V. The clinical spectrum of lipodermatosclerosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1993; 28: 623–7. PubMed
Mei A, Chen J, Chan JJ. Recalcitrant lipodermatosclerosis with ulceration treated with oxandrolone and pentoxifylline. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2024;49(12): 1711–3. PubMed
Choonhakarn C, Chaowattanapanit S, Julanon N. Lipodermatosclerosis: a clinicopathologic correlation. Int J Dermatol 2016; 55: 303–8. PubMed
Dakovic Z, Vesic S, Vukovic J, Pavlovic LJ, Medenica MD. Acute lipodermatosclerosis: an open clinical trial of stanozolol in patients unable to sustain compression therapy. Dermatol Online J 2008; 14(2): 1. PubMed
Jull AB, Arroll B, Parag V, Waters J. Pentoxifylline for treating venous leg ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 12: CD001733. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001733.pub3. PubMed
Choonhakarn C, Chaowattanapanit S. Lipodermatosclerosis: improvement noted with hydroxychloroquine and pentoxifylline. J Am Acad Dermatol 2012; 66: 1013–4. DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2011.11.942. PubMed
Campbell LB, Miller OF, 3rd. Intralesional triamcinolone in the management of lipodermatosclerosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006; 55: 166–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2005.09.043. PubMed
Plewig G, Schopf E. Anti-inflammatory effects of antimicrobial agents: an in vivo study. J Invest Dermatol 1975; 65: 532–6. PubMed
Gilbertson-Beadling S, Powers EA, Stamp-Cole M, et al. The tetracycline analogs minocycline and doxycycline inhibit angiogenesis in vitro by a non-metalloproteinase-dependent mechanism. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995; 36: 418–24. DOI: 10.1007/BF00686191. PubMed
Mackelfresh J, Soon S, Arbiser JL. Combination therapy of doxycycline and topical tacrolimus for venous ulcers. Arch Dermatol 2005; 141: 1476–7. DOI: 10.1001/archderm.141.11.1476. PubMed
Martinez-Zapata MJ, Vernooij RW, Uriona Tuma SM, et al. Phlebotonics for venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 4: CD003229. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003229.pub3. PubMed
Damian DL, Yiasemides E, Gupta S, Armour K. Ultrasound therapy for lipodermatosclerosis. Arch Dermatol 2009; 145: 330–2. DOI: 10.1001/archdermatol.2009.24. Journal
Hamid SA, Ibrahim ZM,  Mohamady AM. The response of skin hardness and pain sensation to ultrasonic treatment in lipodermatosclerosis patients. Egyptian Journal of Medical Human Genetics, 2014;15: 193-198. Journal.
Patel N, Dahl M. Treatment of lipodermatosclerosis with UVA-1. J Am Acad Derm 2016;74 (5): AB229. Journal.
Gohel MS, Barwell JR, Taylor M, et al. Long term results of compression therapy alone versus compression plus surgery in chronic venous ulceration (ESCHAR): randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2007; 335: 83. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.39216.542442.BE. PubMed
Venous insufficiency
Horse chestnut extract
Venous insufficiency — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Livedo Reticularis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/livedo-reticularis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Livedo reticularis — extra information
Blood vessel problems
238772004, 254778000, 238773009, 402846006, 402845005, 238772004
Blood vessel problems
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Dr Sara de Menezes, Basic Physician Trainee, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Australia; Chief Editor, Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, September 2016.
What is livedo reticularis?
Livedo reticularis refers to various conditions in which there is mottled discolouration of the skin. It is described as being reticular (net-like, lace-like), as cyanotic discolouration surrounds pale central skin.
The terminology of livedo reticularis may include:
Cutis marmorata: physiological, variable livedo
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita: a congenital form of persistent livedo
Primary livedo reticularis: a benign form of livedo of unknown cause
Secondary livedo reticularis: association of livedo with an underlying systemic disease
Livedo racemosa: a generalised and persistent form of livedo.
What causes livedo reticularis?
Livedo reticularis results from a disturbance of blood flow to the skin, causing low blood flow and reduced oxygen tension to the skin. Cutaneous vasculature is comprised of a series of 1–3 cm cones. The apex of each cone is located deep within the dermis at the site of an ascending arteriole. At the margin of each cone, the density of the arterial bed is decreased, and the superficial venous plexus is more prominent. Any pathological or physiological process which impairs blood flow to the skin results in higher amounts of deoxygenated haemoglobin, leading to a livid discolouration.
Physiological arteriolar vasospasm in response to cold, produces reversible skin discolouration, such as in cutis marmorata. Prolonged vasospasm, thrombosis or hyperviscosity can cause the pathological skin changes of livedo racemosa.
A unilateral form of livedo reticularis due to local heat injury is known as erythema ab igne.
Who gets livedo reticularis?
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita is a rare condition in which pronounced livedo is present at birth or soon after. It often improves with age. There are several congenital abnormalities associated with cutis marmorata telangiectatica.
Primary livedo reticularis is the idiopathic form in adults and can be persistent. The diagnosis is usually made once other more severe causes of livedo reticularis have been ruled out.
Secondary livedo, or livedo racemosa, is associated with a range of systemic diseases.
Obstruction/vasculopathy
Occlusion of vessels may occur because of a hypercoagulable state. This may present as blue toe syndrome.
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS, also known as lupus anticoagulant syndrome) is characterised by blood clots due to sticky platelets. It results in livedo racemosa in 25% of patients, and 70% of those with SLE-associated APS.
Sneddon syndrome is an association of livedo racemosa with stroke in young adult women.
Livedoid vasculopathy is associated with ulceration due to fibrinolytic abnormalities and microcirculatory thrombosis.
Lymphocytic thrombophilic arteritis
Cryoglobulinaemia (immune globulins that precipitate in the cold)
Polycythaemia rubra vera (excessive number of red cells) or thrombocythaemia
Cold agglutinin disease
Protein C and S deficiency
Antithrombin III deficiency
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Deep venous thrombosis
Autoimmune/vasculitis/connective tissue disease
Small, medium and large vessel vasculitis is associated with livedo racemosa.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Neurological disease
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy
Mycoplasma pneumonia
Viral infection, such as parvovirus, hepatitis C
Bacterial sepsis, such as meningococcal disease, streptococcal disease
Rheumatic fever (erythema marginatum)
Renal cell carcinoma
Inflammatory breast cancer (carcinoma erysipeloides)
Lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
Acute lymphocytic leukaemia
Amantadine (dopamine agonist used to treat Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) causes livedo through arteriolar vasospasm associated with depletion of catecholamines. Drug-associated livedo has also been reported with:
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Cholesterol emboli and homocystinuria
Hypercalcaemia (calcium deposits)
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
Intra-arterial injection (especially in drug addicts)
Primary fibromyalgia
Congenital hypogammaglobulinaemia
What are the clinical features of livedo reticularis?
Livedo reticularis is characterised by:
Net or lace-like cyanotic pattern
Blotchy, reddish-blue to purple (a livid colour)
Transient or persistent
It may be more pronounced in cold conditions
May or may not improve with warming
Cold exposure may result in tingling and numbness of affected skin.
In cutis marmorata, mottling is diffuse, mild and usually symptomless. The livedo commonly occurs on the legs and gradually resolves on rewarming. Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita is more pronounced than cutis marmorata. Primary livedo reticularis in adults is intermittent, and the changes in skin colour are less influenced by ambient temperature.
Cutis marmorata Cutis marmorata
Livedo racemosa often affects the trunk and buttocks as well as legs. The net-like violaceous pattern tends to be composed of irregular, broken macules with an annular pattern.
What are the complications of livedo reticularis?
Livedo reticularis itself is relatively benign. However, thromboembolic disease due to associated conditions such as antiphospholipid syndrome may lead to serious arterial events, including the death of the patient.
How is livedo reticularis diagnosed?
Livedo reticularis/racemosa is diagnosed by its clinical appearance. Investigations are undertaken to seek for an underlying cause (see above) based on careful history and examination, as extensive screening studies are unlikely to be helpful. The lupus anticoagulant panel should be ordered in acquired livedo that is not induced by the cold.
If required, it is best to take at least two biopsies from red/blue and white areas of the livedo and to ask for serial sections to be performed. A palpable site is ideal for a biopsy if present. The red area may just show non-diagnostic telangiectasia. The central white, ischaemic area may reveal an occluded vessel. Even a large skin biopsy of the centre of livedo racemosa ring may be reported as normal. Multiple biopsies may increase the diagnostic yield. The goal of a biopsy is to obtain samples of the medium vessel found in the deep reticular dermis and subcutaneous fat, which may require a wedge or large punch biopsy for increased yield.
Early signs of vasculopathy in livedo racemosa are lymphocytes and histiocytes attaching to endothelial cells. The cells join with fibrin to occlude the lumen of capillaries (lymphocytic thrombophilic arteritis).
This should be distinguished from medium vessel neutrophilic vasculitis occurring in cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa. Other capillaries may be dilated, or replaced by scar tissue (fibrosis).
What treatments are available for livedo reticularis?
There is no specific treatment for livedo reticularis, except for cold avoidance.
Smoking cessation is essential to reduce the risk of associated arterial events such as stroke.
What is the outlook for livedo reticularis?
Livedo reticularis itself is relatively benign. However, thromboembolic disease due to associated conditions such as antiphospholipid syndrome may lead to serious arterial events, including the death of the patient.
Cutis marmorata is usually less evident with age. Over time, in primary livedo reticularis and livedo racemosa, the vessels become permanently dilated, and livedo reticularis becomes permanent regardless of the surrounding temperature.
Book: Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Fourth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Gibbs MB, English JC 3rd, Zirwas MJ. Livedo reticularis: an update. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005 Jun;52(6):1009-19. Medline
Sajjan VV, Lunge S, Swamy MB, Pandit AM. Livedo reticularis: A review of the literature. Indian Dermatol Online J [Internet]. 2015 Sept-Oct [cited 2016 Jul 06];6(5):315-21. Available from: DOI: 10.4103/2229-5178.164493
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Skin manifestations of haematological disease
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Lymphocytic thrombophilic arteritis
Vascular skin problems
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Malassezia Folliculitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/malassezia-folliculitis]
Malassezia (pityrosporum) folliculitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Malassezia folliculitis
Malassezia folliculitis — extra information
Pityrosporum folliculitis
Infections, Follicular disorder
428172002, 707291006
Malassezia folliculitis
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand,1997. Updated by Dr Thomas Stewart, General Practitioner, Sydney, Australia, November 2017. Revised September 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is Malassezia folliculitis?
Malassezia folliculitis, also known as pityrosporum folliculitis, is an infection of the pilosebaceous unit caused by lipophilic Malassezia yeasts particularly M. globosa, M. sympodialis and M. restricta. Malassezia yeast are normal inhabitants of the human skin surface and only cause disease under specific conditions.
Malassezia yeasts have been linked to a number of other skin diseases including seborrhoeic dermatitis and pityriasis versicolor.
Malassezia folliculitis Malassezia folliculitis Malassezia folliculitis
Who gets Malassezia folliculitis?
Malassezia folliculitis is most commonly seen in adolescent and young adult males.
Risk factors for developing Malassezia folliculitis include:
High sebum production
Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating)
Occlusion from emollients and sunscreens
Immunosuppression including topical and oral steroid use and HIV.
What are the clinical features of Malassezia folliculitis?
Malassezia folliculitis presents as small, uniform, itchy papules and pustules particularly on the upper back and chest. Other sites involved can include the forehead/hair line, chin, neck, and extensor aspect of the upper limbs. This is a monomorphic eruption and comedones are not seen, distinguishing this condition from acne vulgaris.
Wood lamp examination may demonstrate a yellow-green fluorescence.
Dermoscopy features have been described and include:
Papules and pustules based on hair follicles
Perifollicular erythema
Hypopigmented and coiled/looped hairs.
How is Malassezia folliculitis diagnosed?
Clinical examination raises the diagnosis. Laboratory investigations on skin scraping, tape stripping, swab, or skin biopsy confirm the presence of yeasts as bacterial folliculitis and steroid acne can be clinically similar.
Potassium hydroxide preparation of skin scrapings may reveal budding yeasts. Hyphae are rarely seen.
Other stains such as the May-Grünwald-Giema stain are less commonly used.
Culture of Malassezia species typically requires special media for growth, so is not routinely performed.
Yeast are seen within the hair follicle and possibly the surrounding dermis on histopathological examination.
What is the differential diagnosis of Malassezia folliculitis?
Diagnosis of Malassezia folliculitis is often delayed due to its clinical resemblance to:
Bacterial folliculitis.
What is the treatment of Malassezia folliculitis?
It is important to address any predisposing factors at the outset, as Malassezia folliculitis has a tendency to recur.
Oral treatment may be more effective than topical, although results of clinical trials have not consistently shown this. Fluconazole is used more commonly than itraconazole due to its superior side effect profile.
Isotretinoin and photodynamic therapy (PDT) have been used with some success in small case series of recalcitrant disease.
How can Malassezia folliculitis be prevented?
Recurrence is common, even after successful treatment.
Long-term prophylaxis with topical agents may be considered in those at high-risk or with multiple recurrences.
Periodic re-evaluation of predisposing factors is recommended.
Durdu M, Güran M, Ilkit M. Epidemiological characteristics of Malassezia folliculitis and use of the May-Grünwald-Giemsa stain to diagnose the infection. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013;76(4):450-7. doi:10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.04.011. PubMed.
Akaza N, Akamatsu H, Sasaki Y, et al. Malassezia folliculitis is caused by cutaneous resident Malassezia species. Med Mycol. 2009;47(6):618-24. doi:10.1080/13693780802398026. PubMed.
Gaitanis G, Velegraki A, Mayser P, Bassukas ID. Skin diseases associated with Malassezia yeasts: facts and controversies. Clin Dermatol. 2013;31(4):455-63. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2013.01.012. PubMed.
Rubenstein RM, Malerich SA. Malassezia (pityrosporum) folliculitis. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7(3):37-41. PubMed.
Hald M, Arendrup MC, Svejgaard EL, et al. Evidence-based Danish guidelines for the treatment of Malassezia-related skin diseases. Acta Derm Venereol. 2015;95(1):12-19. doi:10.2340/00015555-1825. PubMed.
Bäck O, Faergemann J, Hörnqvist R. Pityrosporum folliculitis: a common disease of the young and middle-aged. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1985;12(1 Pt 1):56-61. doi:10.1016/s0190-9622(85)70009-6. PubMed.
Lee JW, Kim BJ, Kim MN. Photodynamic therapy: new treatment for recalcitrant Malassezia folliculitis. Lasers Surg Med. 2010;42(2):192-6. doi:10.1002/lsm.20857. PubMed.
Saunte DML, Gaitanis G, Hay RJ. Malassezia-associated skin diseases, the use of diagnostics and treatment. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020;10:112. doi:10.3389/fcimb.2020.00112. PubMed
Jakhar D, Kaur I, Chaudhary R. Dermoscopy of pityrosporum folliculitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(2):e43-4. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.08.057. PubMed
Malassezia folliculitis – pathology
Malassezia (pityrosporum) folliculitis case 1
Malassezia (Pityrosporum folliculitis) — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Measles]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/measles]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Measles — extra information
Morbilli, Rubeola, English measles
1F03, 1F03.0, EA0Y, 8A45.01
14189004, 52584002, 396427003, 424306000, 271667004, 192685000
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2002. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, October 2016. Updated October 2020
Do you have confirmed measles? Send DermNet your pictures.
Measles, also known as English measles, rubeola or morbilli, is a highly contagious viral infection causing fever and a rash.
Measles is a notifiable disease.
Koplik spots Day 1  Rash Day 3
What is the cause of measles?
Measles is caused by the measles virus, which belongs to the morbillivirus family.
How common is measles?
In developing countries, measles still occurs frequently and is associated with a high rate of complications and death. It remains a common disease even in some developed countries of Europe and Asia.
How do you get measles?
Measles is highly contagious and is easily spread from person to person by breathing in airborne respiratory droplets from an infected person's coughing or sneezing.
An infected person is contagious 2 days before any symptoms show, and remains infectious for at least 5 days after the onset of rash.
An acute infection of measles almost always gives lifelong immunity.
Who is at risk of measles?
Individuals at particular risk of measles infection include:
Infants who have lost their passive immunity from their mothers (acquired from their mother through the transfer of antibody across the placenta) and before their first immunisation
Unvaccinated travellers to areas where measles is endemic
Individuals with immunodeficiency (eg, due to infection with HIV/AIDS, leukaemia, cancer, corticosteroid therapy), regardless of their immunisation status
Migrants and refugees.
The greatest risk for severe measles and its complications is seen in:
Malnourished individuals (particularly children who are deficient in vitamin A)
Those with an underlying immune deficiency
What are the signs and symptoms of measles?
Measles develops through distinct clinical stages.
Ranges from 7–14 days (average 10–11 days).
The patient usually has no symptoms.
Some may experience symptoms of primary viral spread (fever, spotty rash, and respiratory symptoms due to virus in the bloodstream) within 2–3 days of exposure.
Generally begins 10–12 days after exposure.
Presents as fever, malaise, and loss of appetite, followed by conjunctivitis (red eyes), cough, and coryza (blocked or runny nose).
2–3 days into the prodromal phase, Koplik spots appear. These are blue-white spots on the inside of the mouth opposite the molars, and occur 24–48 hours before the exanthem (rash) stage.
Flat red spots ranging from 0.1–1.0cm in diameter appear on the 4th or 5th day following the start of symptoms.
This non-itchy rash begins on the face and behind the ears. Within 24–36 hours it spreads over the entire trunk and extremities (palms and soles rarely involved).
The spots may join together, especially in areas of the face.
The onset of the rash usually coincides with a high fever of at least 40C.
The rash begins to fade 3–4 days after it first appears. It fades first to a purplish hue and then to brown/coppery coloured lesions with fine scales.
A cough may persist for 1–3 weeks.
Measles-associated complications may be the cause of persisting fever beyond the 3rd day of the rash.
How is measles diagnosed?
Confusion with other diseases.
Acute measles is usually confirmed on a viral nasopharyngeal or throat swab analysed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Blood and urine samples can also be used. This should be done within 5 days of onset of rash, however, positive results are sometimes obtained up to 10–14 days after the rash has resolved.
Blood is also taken for measles IgM and IgG antibodies (serology). Levels of specific IgM become elevated during the active infection phase and IgG antibody appears during the recovery phase.
Viral culture of the throat and nasopharyngeal swabs is preferred in immunocompromised patients where serological evidence might be absent due to decreased immune response. An immunofluorescence test for measles antigen can also be considered in patients with poor immunity.
What is the treatment of measles?
Give paracetamol for fever. Aspirin should not be given to a child with a viral illness, as it is associated with the development of Reyes syndrome.
Vitamin A for children in developing countries or that are malnourished. WHO recommends a dose of 200,000 international units (IU) of vitamin A for two days, for reducing measles and its complications. A Cochrane Review found this reduced mortality and pneumonia-related mortality in children under the age of 2 years.
Maintain adequate fluid intake to prevent dehydration.
Use a humidifier to provide relief from cough/sore throat.
Provide nutritional support as necessary.
Observe high-risk individuals carefully to prevent complications.
Patients with drowsiness, dehydration, or discomfort breathing require hospitalisation for supportive care.
Antibiotics are only needed to treat secondary bacterial infections such as otitis media, infectious diarrhoea, pneumonia, and sepsis.
Ribavirin (antiviral) is used to treat measles infection in immunocompromised patients and in those affected with subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
What are the complications from measles?
Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea that may be fatal if dehydration occurs, mouth ulceration, appendicitis, hepatitis, mesenteric adenitis, and pancreatitis.
Ears: otitis media (almost exclusively in children) may lead to deafness.
Respiratory tract: laryngobronchitis, measles croup, and pneumonia (either primary viral or secondary bacterial) — the most common cause of death from measles.
Heart: myocarditis and pericarditis.
Haematological system: thrombocytopenia, causing bleeding and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Eyes: conjunctivitis and/or corneal ulceration leading to blindness (especially if vitamin A deficient), and squint.
Kidneys: acute glomerulonephritis (inflammation of kidneys) and renal failure.
Nervous system: febrile seizures and encephalitis.
Malnutrition (especially if from a poor community).
Measles infection during pregnancy increases the risk of premature labour and delivery, fetal loss and maternal death.
Rarely, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis—a fatal condition—develops decades after a measles infection due to persistence of the measles virus in the central nervous system.
How can measles be prevented?
Measles can be prevented by vaccination with live attenuated measles vaccine. It is available as a single antigen preparation or combined with live attenuated mumps and/or rubella vaccines. Combined measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine is currently part of routine immunisation programmes in most industrialised countries, including New Zealand.
Measles vaccine induces long-term (probably life-long) immunity in most individuals. Vaccination schedules recommend a two-dose immunisation strategy; the first dose at 12–15 months of age, followed by a second dose at 4–6 years.
Measles vaccine should not be given during pregnancy. Women not previously immunised against measles should avoid pregnancy for one month (28 days) after receiving the MMR vaccine.
Immune globulin does not prevent measles, but it is helpful in decreasing the severity of illness in those exposed to the virus. It is recommended for:
People with immune deficiency
Individuals vaccinated prior to 1968 may require revaccination, as vaccines used before this time may not have conferred life-long immunity.
Fragkou PC, Thomas K, Sympardi S, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of measles outbreak in adults: A multicenter retrospective observational study of 93 hospitalized adults in Greece. J Clin Virol. 2020;131:104608. doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104608. PubMed
Huiming Y, Chaomin W, Meng M. Vitamin A for treating measles in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;2005(4):CD001479. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001479.pub3. PubMed
Hummel KB, Lowe L, Bellini WJ, Rota PA. Development of quantitative gene-specific real-time RT-PCR assays for the detection of measles virus in clinical specimens. J Virol Methods. 2006;132(1-2):166–73. doi:10.1016/j.jviromet.2005.10.006. PubMed
Pal G. Effects of ribavirin on measles. J Indian Med Assoc. 2011;109(9):666-7. PubMed
Perry RT, Halsey NA. The clinical significance of measles: a review. J Infect Dis. 2004;189 Suppl 1:S4–S16. doi:10.1086/377712. PubMed
Ratnam S, Tipples G, Head C, Fauvel M, Fearon M, Ward BJ. Performance of indirect immunoglobulin M (IgM) serology tests and IgM capture assays for laboratory diagnosis of measles. J Clin Microbiol. 2000;38(1):99-104. PubMed
Sudfeld CR, Navar AM, Halsey NA. Effectiveness of measles vaccination and vitamin A treatment. Int J Epidemiol. 2010;39 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):i48–i55. doi:10.1093/ije/dyq021. PubMed
White SJ, Boldt KL, Holditch SJ, Poland GA, Jacobson RM. Measles, mumps, and rubella. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;55(2):550–9. doi:10.1097/GRF.0b013e31824df256. PubMed
(accessed 23/10/2020)
Measles — Medline Plus
Measles — Immunisation Handbook 2017, Ministry of Health, NZ
Measles — Immunisation Advisory Centre, University of Auckland
Measles World Health Organization (WHO)
Measles, rubeola — Medscape Reference
Measles — emedicinehealth
Measles — NHS Choices
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Melanocytic Naevus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/melanocytic-naevus]
Moles (melanocytic naevi, pigmented nevi)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Melanocytic naevus — extra information
Mole, Pigmented naevus, Naevocytic naevus
2F20.Z, 2F20.2Z, 2F20.0
400096001, 402552003, 399899001, 400010006, 398696001, 302838006, 398943008, 254804007, 398028009, 254806009, 254815002, 201281002, 398660000, 254817005, 40467008, 398028009, 254811006, 254812004, 254818000
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton New Zealand, in 1997. Updated in January 2016.
What is a melanocytic naevus?
A melanocytic naevus (American spelling ‘nevus’), or mole, is a common benign skin lesion due to a local proliferation of pigment cells (melanocytes). It is sometimes called a naevocytic naevus or just 'naevus' (but note that there are other types of naevi). A brown or black melanocytic naevus contains the pigment melanin, so may also be called a pigmented naevus.
A melanocytic naevus can be present at birth (a congenital melanocytic naevus) or appear later (an acquired naevus). There are various kinds of congenital and acquired melanocytic naevi (American spelling 'nevi').
Who gets melanocytic naevi?
Almost everyone has at least one melanocytic naevus.
Fair-skinned people tend to have more melanocytic naevi than darker skinned people.
Melanocytic naevi that appear during childhood (aged 2 to 10 years) tend to be the most prominent and persistent throughout life.
Melanocytic naevi that are acquired later in childhood or adult life often follow sun exposure and may fade away or involute later.
Most white-skinned New Zealanders have 20–50 melanocytic naevi.
What causes melanocytic naevi?
Although the exact reason for the local proliferation of naevus cells is unknown, it is clear that the number of melanocytic naevi a person has depends on genetic factors, on sun exposure, and on immune status.
People with many melanocytic naevi tend to have family members that also have many similar lesions.
Somatic mutations in RAS genes are associated with congenital melanocytic naevi.
New melanocytic naevi may erupt following the use of BRAF inhibitor drugs (vemurafenib, dabrafenib).
People living in Australia and New Zealand have many more naevi than their relatives residing in Northern Europe.
Immunosuppressive treatment leads to an increase in the numbers of naevi.
What are the clinical features of melanocytic naevi?
Melanocytic naevi vary widely in clinical, dermatoscopic and histological appearance.
They may arise on any part of the body.
They differ in appearance depending on the body site.
They may be flat or protruding.
They vary in colour from pink or flesh tones to dark brown, steel blue, or black.
Light-skinned individuals tend to have light-coloured naevi and dark-skinned individuals tend to have dark brown or black naevi.
Although mostly round or oval in shape, moles are sometimes unusual shapes.
They range in size from a couple of millimetres to several centimetres in diameter.
Classification of melanocytic naevi
Congenital melanocytic naevus
Congenital melanocytic naevi are classified according to their actual or predicted adult size in maximum dimension and on specific characteristics.
Small congenital naevus
Medium congenital naevus
Hairy congenital naevus
Small congenital naevus is 1.5 cm diameter.
Medium congenital naevi are 1.5–19.9 cm diameter.
A large or giant congenital melanocytic naevus is ≥ 20 cm
Hairy congenital naevi grow thick long hairs.
Speckled lentiginous naevus
Café au lait macule is a flat brown patch.
Speckled lentiginous naevus is a flat brown patch with darker spots.
Naevus of Ota is a bluish brown mark around forehead, eye and cheek.
Mongolian spot is a large bluish mark most often seen on buttocks of a newborn.
The pathological classification of melanocytic naevi relates to where naevus cells are found in the skin.
A junctional naevus has groups or nests of naevus cells at the junction of the epidermis and the dermis. A flat mole.
A dermal or intradermal naevus has naevus cell nests in the dermis. A papule, plaque or nodule with a pedunculated, papillomatous (Unna naevus) or smooth surface (Miescher naevus).
A compound naevus has nests of naevus cells at the epidermal-dermal junction as well as within the dermis. A central raised area surrounded by a flat patch.
A combined naevus has two distinct types of mole within the same lesion – usually blue naevus and compound naevus.
Dermatoscopy has given rise to a new classification based on the pigment patterns of melanocytic naevi. Examples include:
Reticular naevus reveals a lattice of intersecting brown lines.
Globular naevus characteristically shows aggregated brown oval structures.
The blue naevus is a uniform structureless lesion, steel blue in colour.
Starburst naevus reveals radial lines around the periphery of the lesion.
Site-related naevus: facial
Site-related naevus: acral
Naevus with special features
Unclassifiable naevus
Facial naevi reveal pseudonetwork around hair follicles
Acral naevi (these are on palms and soles) tend to be made up of parallel lines.
Naevi with special features include eczematised naevus (illustrated), irritated naevi and halo naevi.
The unclassifiable naevus doesn't have any of the other patterns.
Acquired melanocytic naevus
Ordinary moles that appear after birth may be referred to as acquired naevi. Acquired melanocytic naevi are given a variety of names and there is considerable overlap of descriptions.
Signature naevi are the predominant group of naevi in an individual with multiple moles.
Solid brown naevi have uniform brown pigmentation.
Solid pink naevi are seen in fair-skinned individuals and lack melanin pigmentation.
Eclipse naevus has a ring, or segment of a ring, of darker pigment around a tan or pink centre. Often found in the scalp.
Cockade, or naevus en cocarde/cockade, has a central dark naevus surrounded by concentric circles of light and dark pigmentation like a rosette.
Naevus with perifollicular hypopigmentation
Naevus with eccentric pigmentation
Naevi with perifollicular hypopigmentation have white spots around each hair. Easier to see by dermoscopy.
Fried-egg naevus is a compound naevus with a flat rim of pigment around a bumpy central portion – the bump can be lighter or darker than the pigmented rim.
Lentiginous naevi are small, dark brown or black, flat lesions, often with a slightly paler rim – people with multiple lentiginous naevi have been said to have cheetah phenotype.
The Bolognia sign refers to a harmless, small area of darker colour on one side of the naevus.
Uncommon types of melanocytic naevi include:
Spitz naevus or epithelioid cell naevus: a pink (classic Spitz) or brown (pigmented Spitz) dome-shaped mole that arises in children and young adults.
Reed naevus: darkly pigmented type of Spitz naevus with starburst dermatoscopic pattern
Agminated naevi: a cluster of similar moles
Kissing naevus: adjacent melanocytic naevi on upper and lower eyelids, due to naevus formation prior to separation of eyelids in utero.
The term atypical naevus may be used in several ways.
A benign lesion that has some clinical or histopathological characteristics of melanoma
A melanocytic naevus with specific characteristics: large (> 5 mm); ill-defined or irregular borders; varying shades of colour; with flat and bumpy components.
Or, any funny-looking naevus; large, or different from the patient’s other naevi.
Atypical naevi usually occur in fair-skinned individuals and are due to sun exposure. They may be solitary or numerous. Pathology is reported as dysplastic junctional or compound naevus and has specific histological features (the Clark naevus).
A common naevus is a flat mole with a single uniform colour.
In dark skin, naevi are often black in colour.
People with multiple atypical naevi are at increased risk of melanoma (cancerous mole).
Dysplastic naevus describes an atypical mole that has specific histological criteria.
Blue naevus is a deeply pigmented type of dermal naevus.
Cellular naevus is a non-pigmented dermal naevus.
Miescher naevus is a dome-shaped smooth dermal naevus often found on the face.
Unna naevus is a papillomatous dermal naevus that is in the shape of a raspberry.
Meyerson naevus is a naevus affected by a halo of eczema/dermatitis.
Halo naevus or Sutton naevus has a white halo around the mole. The mole gradually fades away over several years.
Spitz naevus or epithelioid cell naevus is a pink (classic Spitz) or brown (pigmented Spitz) dome-shaped mole that arises in children and young adults.
Reed or spindle cell naevus is a very dark-coloured mole with spindle-shaped dermal melanocytes, usually found on the limbs.
Recurrent naevus refers to the reappearance of pigment in a scar following surgical removal of a mole – this may have an odd shape.
An agminated naevus is a cluster of similar moles or freckles.
Acral naevus refers to one on the palm or sole.
Nail unit naevus causes a uniform longitudinal band of pigment on a nail.
What are the complications of melanocytic naevi?
At first, melanoma may look similar to a harmless melanocytic naevus, but in time it becomes more disordered in structure and tends to enlarge.
People with a greater number of naevi have a higher risk of developing melanoma than those with few naevi, especially if they have over 100 of them.
Melanocytic naevi sometimes change for other reasons than melanoma, for example following sun exposure or during pregnancy. They can enlarge, regress or involute (disappear).
A Meyerson naevus is itchy and dry because it is surrounded by eczema.
A Sutton or halo naevus is surrounded by a white patch and fades away over several years
A recurrent naevus is one that appears in a scar following surgical removal of a melanocytic naevus — this may have an odd shape.
How is a melanocytic naevus diagnosed?
A naevus changes size, shape, structure or colour
A new naevus develops in adult life (> 40 years)
It appears different from the person’s other naevi (a so-called ugly duckling)
It has ABCD characteristics (Asymmetry, Border irregularity, Colour variation, Diameter > 6 mm)
It is bleeding, crusted or itchy.
Most skin lesions with these characteristics are actually harmless when evaluated by an expert using dermatoscopy. Short-term digital dermatoscopic imaging may be used in equivocal flat lesions to check for change over time.
Naevi that remain suspicious for melanoma are excised for histopathology (diagnostic biopsy). A partial biopsy is not recommended, as it may miss an area of cancerous change.
What is the treatment for melanocytic naevus?
Most melanocytic naevi are harmless and can be safely left alone. They may be removed in the following circumstances:
If a naevus is a nuisance: perhaps irritated by clothing, comb or razor
Cosmetic reasons: the mole is unsightly.
Surgical techniques include:
Excision biopsy of a flat or suspicious melanocytic naevus
Shave biopsy of a protruding melanocytic naevus
Electrosurgical destruction
Laser to lessen pigment or remove coarse hair.
Can melanocytic naevi be prevented?
The number of melanocytic naevi can be minimised by strict protection from the sun, starting from birth. Sunscreen alone is not sufficient to prevent new naevi from appearing.
At any age, sun protection is important to reduce skin ageing and the risk of skin cancer.
In New Zealand, the SunSmart Sun Protection Alert advises when protection is required.
Cover up. Wear a hat, long sleeves and a long skirt or trousers. Choose fabrics designed for the sun (UPF 40+) when outdoors.
Apply sunscreen to areas you can't cover. Choose broad-spectrum high protection (SPF 50+) sunscreens, applied frequently to exposed areas.
What is the outlook for melanocytic naevi?
Most melanocytic naevi that appear in childhood remain forever. Teenagers and young adults tend to have the greatest number of naevi. There are fewer in later life because some of them slowly fade away.
To increase the chance of spotting melanoma early, recommend:
A self-skin examination monthly
A patient noticing a significant change in a mole or a new lesion should show this to their doctor or dermatologist
Regular skin examinations in patients with many naevi, atypical naevi, or who have had a previous skin cancer
Total body photography and digital dermatoscopic imaging (mole mapping) for patients at high risk of melanoma, especially if they have many melanocytic naevi.
Signature nevi. Suh KY, Bolognia JL. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Mar;60(3):508–14. Review. Medline.
Melanocytic naevi – pathology
Self skin examination
Skin lesions, tumours and cancers
Common benign skin lesions
Benign melanocytic lesions — common skin lesions course
Ultraviolet radiation
Moles — Medline Plus
Nevus Outreach, Inc.: A non-profit organization dedicated to improving awareness and finding a cure for Congenital Nevi and Neurocutaneous Melanosis.
Melanocytic nevi — Medscape Reference
Melanocytic Naevi (Moles) — British Association of Dermatologists
Grain de beauté — Dr Ph Abimelec website (French)
Moles and melanoma: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Moles — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Melanonychia]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/melanonychia]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Melanonychia — extra information
Nail pigmentation, Melanonychia striata
Pigmentary disorders, Terminology
402633003, 707197003, 707197007
Pigmentary disorders
Author: Ken Hiu-Kan Ip, Medical Student, University of Auckland, New Zealand; Chief Editor: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand; Copy Editor: Clare Morrison, June 2014. Updated by Dr Ebtisam Elghblawi and Dr Oakley in October 2017.
What is melanonychia?
Melanonychia is brown or black discolouration of a nail. It may be diffuse or take the form of a longitudinal band.
Benign longitudinal melanonychia
Who is at risk of melanonychia?
Melanonychia can present in individuals of all ages, including children, and affects both sexes equally. It is more prevalent in people with skin of colour, especially Fitzpatrick skin type V and VI.
Nearly all Afro-Caribbean people will develop black-brown pigmentation of the nails by the age of 50.
Melanonychia affects up to 20% of Japanese people.
White-skinned people are less commonly affected.
Melanonychia can also be associated with genetic disorders, injury, medications, nutritional deficiency, endocrine disease, connective tissue disease, inflammatory skin disease, a local tumour, or nail infection.
What causes melanonychia?
The nail plate is a hard, translucent structure made of keratin. It is not normally pigmented. Melanocytes typically lie dormant in the proximal nail matrix where the nail originates. Melanin is deposited into the growing nail when melanocytes are activated, resulting in a pigmented band — this is longitudinal melanonychia.
The deposition of melanin in the nail plate can result from 2 processes:
Melanocytic hyperplasia
Melanocytic activation.
Melanocytic hyperplasia
Melanocytic hyperplasia refers to an increased number of melanocytes within the nail matrix. This can represent a benign or malignant process.
Melanocytic naevi arise more commonly in children. Histologically there are nests of naevus cells.
Lentigines are seen more commonly in adults. Nests are absent.
Malignant hyperplasia
Melanoma of the nail unit most commonly affects the thumbs, index fingers and big toes.
Melanocytic activation
Melanocytic activation is an increase in the production and deposition of melanin into the nail cells (onychocytes), without an increase in the number of melanocytes. The causes of melanocytic activation are listed in the table below.
Melanonychia associated with melanocytic activation
Physiological (functional)
Racial variation Pregnancy
Nail biting, chewing, breaking and picking Friction due to foot deformity or footwear
Inflammatory skin disease
Psoriasis Acrodermatitis of Hallopeau Lichen planus Amyloidosis
Nonmelanocytic lesions
Intraepidermal carcinoma Basal cell carcinoma Viral wart
Nutritional deficiency
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Addison disease Cushing syndrome Hyperthyroidism Acromegaly
Another systemic disease
Haemosiderosis Porphyria cutanea tarda Human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV) Systemic lupus erythematosus Systemic sclerosis
Laugier-Hunziker syndrome Peutz-Jeghers syndrome Touraine syndrome
Phototherapy X-ray exposure; electron beam therapy
Chemotherapy agents (especially hydroxyurea, busulfan, bleomycin, adriamycin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil Anti-malarial therapy
Pathogens can cause an irregular melanonychia as they stimulate inflammation activating melanocytes. For example:
Gram-negative bacteria (Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas)
Onychomycosis due to a dermatophyte (Trichophyton rubrum) or yeast (Candida albicans).
External agents can stain the nails.
Pigmented onychomycosis
What are the possible complications of melanonychia?
Complications depend on the cause of melanonychia.
Subungual melanoma can result in metastasis and ultimately, the death of the patient. The prognosis for nail matrix melanoma is as a rule worse than melanoma in other sites.
Trauma, infection, and inflammatory disease can result in fissuring and splitting of the nails and unsightly or painful nail dystrophy.
What is the management of melanonychia?
Where melanonychia is attributed to a benign cause, no further treatment is necessary.
The management of melanoma of the nail unit requires complete excision of the tumour and may require amputation of the digit.
What is the outlook for patients with melanonychia?
Melanonychia tends to persist, except when it is related to medication — in which case it fades following its withdrawal.
Rook's Textbook of Dermatology. 4th edition. Eds: Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Mannava KA, et al. Longitudinal melanonychia: detection and management of nail melanoma. Hand Surgery 2013; 18: 133–9. PubMed
Jefferson J, Rich P. Melanonychia. Dermatol Res Pract 2012; 2012: 952186. PubMed
Haneke E, Baran R. Longitudinal melanonychia. Dermatol Surg 2001; 27: 580–4. PubMed
Benati E, Ribero S, Longo C, Piana S, Puig S, Carrera C, Cicero F, Kittler H, Deinlein T, Zalaudek I, Stolz W, Scope A, Pellacani G, Moscarella E, Piraccini BM, Starace M, Argenziano G. Clinical and dermoscopic clues to differentiate pigmented nail bands: an International Dermoscopy Society study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2016. doi:10.1111/jdv.13991. Journal
Braun RP, Baran R, Le Gal FA, Dalle S, Ronger S, Pandolfi R, Gaide O, French LE, Laugier P, Saurat JH, Marghoob AA, Thomas L. Diagnosis and management of nail pigmentations. J Am Acad Dermatol 2007; 56: 835–47. PubMed
Melanoma of the nail unit
Dermatoscopy of the nail
Drug-induced nail disease
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Miliaria]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/miliaria]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Miliaria — extra information
Sweat rash, Prickly heat
L74.0, L74.1, L74.2, L74.3
EE02, EE02.0, EE02.Y, KC40.1
63951004, 44279002, 72658003, 47317002, 201195008, 26988005, 402824003, 402821006
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Anita Eshraghi, Dermatologist, Sweden. February 2018. Revised September 2020
Differential diagnoses
Miliaria is a common skin disease caused by blockage and/or inflammation of eccrine sweat ducts. Miliaria is frequently seen in hot, humid, or tropical climates, in patients in hospital, and in the neonatal period. Miliaria is also known as heat rash, sweat rash or prickly heat.
Based on the level of the sweat duct obstruction, miliaria is divided into three types:
Miliaria crystallina (sudamina) is due to obstruction of the sweat ducts close to the surface of the skin in the stratum corneum of the epidermis
Miliaria rubra follows obstruction of the sweat ducts in the deeper layers of the skin (mid-epidermis)
Miliaria profunda (tropical anhidrosis) is the result of sweat leaking from the sweat glands into the middle layer of skin (blockage at or below the dermoepidermal junction) following repeated episodes of miliaria rubra.
Miliaria crystallina affects up to 9% of neonates, with the mean age of 1 week. It can also occur in adults with fever.
Miliaria rubra is the most common type of heat rash. It is seen in children and in up to 30% of adults who move to a tropical environment or are unexpectedly exposed to heat and humidity. Although miliaria may develop within days of arriving in the tropics, it often takes several months to peak.
Miliaria profunda is rare and presents in adult males.
Heat rash can affect all age groups and racial groups.
What causes miliaria?
Prickly heat results from sweating. The main contributing causes and risk factors are:
Immature sweat ducts in a newborn child
A hot and humid environment
Intense exercise or physical activity
Occlusion of the skin with non-porous dressings or synthetic clothing against the skin
Hospitalised or bedridden patients lying on waterproofed mattresses or mattress-protectors.
Other diseases and treatments that have been associated with miliaria are:
Drug-induced hyperhidrosis
Adverse reaction to medication such as induction chemotherapy
Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
Genetic disease (Morvan syndrome and pseudohypoaldosteronism type I)
What are the clinical features of miliaria?
Symptoms of heat rash vary depending on type:
Miliaria crystallina presents as 1–2 mm superficial clear blisters that easily break. The blisters can look like beads of sweat. There is no inflammation. The blisters are usually seen widely spread on the head, neck, and upper trunk. The vesicles break easily to leave a bran-like scale.
Miliaria rubra, the most common form of heat rash, results in red, 2–4 mm, non-follicular papules and papulovesicles. They are very itchy. Background erythema is often present. In children, miliaria involves the trunk and the skin folds of the neck, axilla or groin. In adults, miliaria often affects the upper trunk, scalp, neck and flexures, particularly in areas of friction with clothing.
Miliaria pustulosa is a variant of miliaria rubra with pustules.
Miliaria profunda presents as asymptomatic deep papules. The flesh–coloured, 1–3 mm diameter papules develop on the trunk and extremities.
What are the complications of miliaria?
Complications of miliaria include:
Secondary bacterial infection, commonly caused by staphylococci
Impaired thermoregulation
Hyperhidrosis in non-affected areas.
How is miliaria diagnosed?
Heat rash is diagnosed on its typical clinical presentation.
Tzanck smear taken from vesicles will distinguish miliaria from herpes simplex or toxic erythema of the newborn.
What is the differential diagnosis for miliaria?
Skin disorders presenting with papules, vesicles, or pustules that look similar to miliaria include:
Bacterial folliculitis
Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Toxic erythema of newborn
What is the treatment for miliaria?
Resolution of miliaria requires minimising heat and humidity to reduce sweating and the avoidance of irritation to the skin. Strategies to avoid sweating, keeping the skin cool, and reducing irritation can help treat and prevent heat rash:
Work in an air-conditioned office for at least a few hours a day
Sleep in a ventilated, cool bedroom
Move away from a tropical climate, avoiding humid weather
Avoid excessive clothing and tight clothing
Avoid excessive soap and irritants
Wear shirts and blouses made of breathable synthetic fabrics or cotton
Cool water compresses and taking a cool bath
Patients should be education on symptoms of heat exhausation.
Heat rash may require medical care which can involve:
Calamine lotion to relieve discomfort; because calamine lotion is drying, an emollient may be required.
Treatment of fever with antipyretic such as paracetamol (American terminology acetoaminophen)
Mild topical steroids
Antiseptics and anti-staphylococcal antibiotics for secondary infection.
What is the outcome for miliaria?
Haas N, Martens F, Henz BM. Miliaria crystallina in an intensive care setting. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2004;29(1):32–4. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2230.2004.01444.x. PubMed.
Carter R 3rd, Garcia AM, Souhan BE. Patients presenting with miliaria while wearing flame resistant clothing in high ambient temperatures: a case series. J Med Case Rep. 2011;5:474. doi:10.1186/1752-1947-5-474. PubMed Central.
Godkar D, Razaq M, Fernandez G. Rare skin disorder complicating doxorubicin therapy: miliaria crystallina. Am J Ther. 2005;12(3):275–6. PubMed
Nguyen TA, Ortega-Loayza AG, Stevens MP. Miliaria-rash after neutropenic fever and induction chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia. An Bras Dermatol. 2011;86(4 Suppl 1):S104–6. doi:10.1590/s0365-05962011000700027. PubMed.
Miller JL. Diseases of the eccrine and apocrine sweat glands. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer J, Cerroni L (eds). Dermatology [2 volumes], Elsevier, 2017.
Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016.
Miller JL. Miliaria. UpToDate. Updated 26 May 2017. Available at: (accessed 19 February 2018).
Disorders of sweating
Drug-induced hyperhidrosis
Blistering skin conditions
Dermatologic Manifestations of Miliaria — Medscape Reference
Patient information: Heat rash (prickly heat) (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Milium]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/milium]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Milium — extra information
254679001, 254680003, 238749001, 404097000, 129219004, 254681004
Author: Dr Monisha Gupta, Dermatologist, Sydney, Australia; Amanda Oakley FRACP, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2009.
A milium is a small cyst containing keratin (the skin protein); they are usually multiple and are then known as milia. These harmless cysts present as tiny pearly-white bumps just under the surface of the skin.
What are the clinical features of milia?
Milia are common in all ages and both sexes. They most often arise on the face and are particularly prominent on the eyelids and cheeks, but they may occur elsewhere.
There are various kinds of milia.
Affect 40–50% of newborn babies
Few to numerous lesions
Often seen on the nose, but may also arise inside the mouth on the gum margins (Bohn nodules) or palate (Epstein pearls) or more widely on the scalp, face and upper trunk
Heal spontaneously within a few weeks of birth.
Primary milia in children and adults
Found around eyelids, cheeks, forehead and genitalia.
In young children, a row of milia may appear along the nasal crease.
May clear in a few weeks or persist for months or longer.
Associated with Rombo syndrome, basal cell naevus syndrome, Bazex-Dupre-Christol syndrome, pachyonychia congenita, Gardner syndrome and other genetic disorders
May be congenital (present at birth) or appear later in life.
Neonatal centrofacial milia Periocular milia Milia associated with epidermolysis bullosa
Multiple milia appear on within an inflamed plaque up to several centimetres in diameter.
Usually found on an eyelid, behind the ear, on a cheek or jaw.
Affect children and adults, especially middle-aged women.
Sometimes associated with another skin disease including pseudoxanthoma elasticum, discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planus.
Multiple eruptive milia
Crops of numerous milia appear over a few weeks to months.
Lesions may be asymptomatic or itchy.
Most often affect the face, upper arms and upper trunk.
Occur at the site of injury as the skin heals.
Arise from eccrine sweat ducts.
Examples include thermal burns, dermabrasion, blistering rashes such as bullous pemphigoid.Often seen on the back of hands and fingers in porphyria cutanea tarda, and on the vulva in lichen sclerosus (see Vulval cysts).
A milia-like calcified nodule may develop after neonatal heel stick blood test.
Milia associated with drugs
May rarely follow the use of topical medication, such as phenols, hydroquinone, 5-fluorouracil cream, and a corticosteroid.
Milia-en-plaque Periocular milia Milia after pemphigoid blisters
How are milia diagnosed?
Milia have a characteristic appearance. However, on occasion, a skin biopsy may be performed. This shows a small epidermoid cyst coming from a vellus hair follicle.
Milia should be distinguished from other types of cyst, comedones, xanthelasma and syringomas. Colloid milia are golden coloured bumps on cheeks and temples associated with excessive exposure to sunlight.
They should also be distinguished from milia-like cysts noted on dermoscopy in seborrhoeic keratoses, papillomatous moles and some basal cell carcinomas.
What is the treatment of milia?
Milia do not need to be treated unless they are a cause for concern for the patient. They often clear up by themselves within a few months. Where possible, further trauma should be minimised to reduce the development of new lesions.
The lesion may be de-roofed using a sterile needle or blade and the contents squeezed or pricked out.
They may be destroyed using diathermy and curettage, or cryotherapy.
For widespread lesions, topical retinoids may be helpful.
Chemical peels, dermabrasion and laser ablation have been reported to be effective when used for very extensive milia.
Milia en plaque may improve with minocycline (a tetracycline antibiotic).
Berk DR, Bayliss SJ. Milia: a review and classification. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;59(6):1050–63. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2008.07.034. PubMed
Standard dermatology textbooks by Rook, Bolognia and Fitzpatrick.
Milia — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Morbilliform Drug Reaction]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/morbilliform-drug-reaction]
Morbilliform drug reaction (maculopapular drug eruption)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Morbilliform drug reaction
Morbilliform drug reaction — extra information
Maculopapular drug eruption, Exanthematous drug eruption, Maculopapular drug exanthem
247470007, 50495000, 238814003
Morbilliform drug reaction
Author: Dr Delwyn Dyall-Smith FACD, Dermatologist, Australia, 2009. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, January 2016.
What is morbilliform drug reaction?
Morbilliform drug eruption is the most common form of drug eruption. Many drugs can trigger this allergic reaction, but antibiotics are the most common group. The eruption may resemble exanthems caused by viral and bacterial infections.
A morbilliform skin rash in an adult is usually due to a drug.
In a child, it is more likely to be viral in origin.
Morbilliform drug eruption is also called maculopapular drug eruption, exanthematous drug eruption and maculopapular exanthem.
Morbilliform drug eruption Morbilliform drug eruption Purpuric morbilliform eruption due to thrombocytopenia
Who gets morbilliform drug eruption?
They mainly affect people prescribed beta-lactam antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins), sulfonamides, allopurinol, anti-epileptic drugs and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID). Numerous other drugs have been reported to cause morbilliform drug eruptions, including herbal and natural therapies.
Predisposing factors include:
Previous drug eruption or strong family history of drug eruptions
Underlying viral infection, particularly acute Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, infectious mononucleosis) and human herpesvirus 6 and 7 (see also roseola, pityriasis rosea)
Immunodeficiency including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cystic fibrosis, autoimmune disorders
Multiple medications
What causes morbilliform drug eruption?
Morbilliform drug eruption is a form of allergic reaction. It is mediated by cytotoxic T-cells and classified as a Type IV immune reaction. The target of attack may be drug, a metabolite of the drug, or a protein bonded to the drug. Inflammation follows the release of cytokines and other effector immune cells.
What are the clinical features of morbilliform drug eruption?
On the first occasion, a morbilliform rash usually appears 1–2 weeks after starting the drug, but it may occur up to 1 week after stopping it. On re-exposure to the causative (or related) drug, skin lesions appear within 1–3 days. It is very rare for a drug that has been taken for months or years to cause a morbilliform drug eruption.
Morbilliform drug eruption usually first appears on the trunk and then spreads to the limbs and neck. The distribution is bilateral and symmetrical.
The primary lesion is a pink-to-red flat macule or papule.
Annular, targetoid, urticaria-like or polymorphous morphology may occur.
Lesions mostly blanch with pressure but may be non-blanchable (purpuric) on the lower legs.
Discrete lesions may merge together to form large erythematous patches or plaques.
Axilla, groin, hands and feet are usually spared.
Paradoxical prominent rash in axillae and groins may be due to symmetrical drug related intertriginous and flexural exanthem (SDRIFE)
Mucous membranes, hair and nails are not affected in uncomplicated drug eruptions.
The rash may be associated with a mild fever and itch. As it improves, the redness dies away and the surface skin peels off.
What are the complications of morbilliform drug eruption?
In the early phase, it may not be possible to clinically distinguish an uncomplicated morbilliform eruption from other more serious cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR). These are:
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome
Stevens Johnson syndrome – toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN)
Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Patients with the following symptoms/signs should be hospitalised for specialist assessment and supportive care.
Erythroderma (whole-body involvement)
High fever or significant malaise
Any mucosal involvement
Evidence of other organ involvement (eg liver, kidneys, lungs, blood)
How is morbilliform drug eruption diagnosed?
A strong clinical suspicion of morbilliform drug eruption depends on:
Typical exanthematous rash
Recently introduced medication
To identify the possible causative drug, a drug calendar, including all prescribed and over-the counter products, may be helpful. The starting date of each new drug is documented together with the onset of the rash. The calendar must extend back at least 2 weeks and up to one month. Drugs can then be classified as unlikely or likely causes based on:
Time relative to onset of the rash
The specific drug; some drugs can be excluded as rarely causing allergy
Patient’s past experience with other drugs in the same class
There are no routine tests to make the diagnosis or to identify the culprit drug. Differential diagnosis includes measles, rubella, scarlet fever, non-specific toxic erythema associated with infection, Kawasaki disease, connective tissue disease and acute graft-versus-host disease.
Tests are not usually necessary if the cause has been identified and stopped, the rash is mild and the patient is well. They may include:
Routine blood count, liver and kidney function tests, C-reactive protein
Serology for infections that can cause similar rashes
Possible skin biopsy, which shows interface dermatitis, mixed perivascular infiltration and other histopathological features.
Eosinophilia is supportive but not diagnostic. Further investigations will depend on clinical features, progress of the patient, and the results of the initial tests.
What is the treatment for morbilliform drug eruption?
The most important thing is to identify the causative drug and if possible, stop it. If the reaction is mild, and the drug is essential and not replaceable, obtain a specialist opinion whether it is safe to continue the drug before doing so.
Monitor the patient carefully in case of complications.
Apply emollients and potent topical steroid creams.
Consider wet wraps for very red, inflamed skin.
Antihistamines are often prescribed, but in general they not very helpful.
How can morbilliform drug eruption be prevented?
It is not possible to completely prevent morbilliform eruptions. Prescribers must be vigilant. Their incidence may be reduced by:
Minimising prescriptions for antibiotics
Adding the reaction to the medical record alerts
What is the outlook for morbilliform drug eruption?
If the causative drug is ceased, the rash begins to improve within 48 hours and clears within 1–2 weeks.
If the drug is continued, the rash may:
Resolve despite continued exposure to the drug
Persist without change
Progress to erythroderma
Dermatology. Jean L. Bolognia, Joseph Jorizzo and Ronald Rapini. 2 volume set. 2nd Edition 2007. 2432 pages. Mosby.
Cotliar J. Approach to the patient with a suspected drug eruption. Semin. Cutan. Med. Surg. 2007; 26:147–154. PubMed
Mays SR, Kunishige JH, Truong E, Kontoyiannis DP, Hymes SR. Approach to the morbilliform eruption in the hematopoietic transplant patient. Semin. Cutan. Med. Surg. 2007; 26:155–162. PubMed
Yawalkar N. Drug-induced exanthems. Toxicology 2005; 209: 131–4. PubMed
Understanding drug eruptions — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Drug eruptions — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Nail Disorders]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/nail-disorders]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Nail disorders — extra information
Congenital malalignment of the great toenails
Drug-induced nail disease
Dyskeratosis congenita
Fungal nail infections
Habit-tic nail deformity
Median canaliform nail dystrophy
Medical nail avulsion
Melanoma of nail unit
Nail cosmetics allergy
Onychocryptosis (ingrown nails)
Parakeratosis pustulosa
Psoriatic nail disease
Subungual haemorrhage/haematoma
Twenty nail dystrophy
Yellow nail syndrome
Other websitesOne year of fingernail growth — Reddit post
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Nail Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/nail-psoriasis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Nail psoriasis — extra information
Psoriatic nail dystrophy, Psoriatic nail disease, Psoriasis of the nails
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
238604005, 238607003, 238605006, 238606007
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003; A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, February 2016; DermNet Update August 2021. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell
Differential diagnoses
What is nail psoriasis?
Nail psoriasis, also known as psoriatic nail dystrophy, is due to psoriasis involving the nail matrix or nail bed, resulting in specific and non-specific clinical changes in the nail.
Nail psoriasis Nail psoriasis Nail psoriasis
Who gets nail psoriasis?
Nail psoriasis affects 90% of patients with chronic plaque psoriasis at some time in their life. It is more common in adults with a prevalence of up to 80%, compared to children in whom it has been reported in 7–13%. In the absence of skin or joint disease, psoriatic nail disease has been described in 5–10% of adults.
Psoriatic nail disease may be a risk factor the development of psoriatic arthritis and is often associated with prolonged severe cutaneous psoriasis.
Nail psoriasis can affect all races and age groups, and both sexes, although a male predominance has been reported in one large case series.
What causes nail psoriasis?
Psoriasis is a multifactorial systemic disease including inflammation and epidermal hyperproliferation.
Nail psoriasis can involve the nail bed, nail matrix, hyponychium, and nail folds.
Activation of the antimicrobial peptide LL-37 by Candida and the cytokine overflow theory
Increased expression of interleukin(IL)-10 in the affected nail bed compared to downregulation of IL-10 in psoriatic skin lesions
Koebnerisation of psoriasis in onychomycosis or nail trauma.
What are the clinical features of nail psoriasis?
Fingernails and toenails can be affected by nail psoriasis.
Psoriatic nail dystrophy can cause tenderness and pain, altered sense of fine touch, and difficulty picking up or manipulating objects such as shoelaces or buttons.
Clinical signs of nail matrix involvement
Onychorrhexis (longitudinal nail ridge, split, or fissure)
Beau lines (transverse lines and ridges)
Signs of psoriatic nail matrix involvement
Pitting and onychorrhexis Leukonychia and Beau lines Crumbling nails
Clinical signs of nail bed involvement
Oil-drop sign and salmon patch
Onycholysis — typically with a pink zone proximally
Subungual hyperkeratosis
Splinter haemorrhages under the distal third of the nail plate
Signs of psoriatic nail bed involvement
Onycholysis and salmon patch Subungual hyperkeratosis Splinter haemorrhages
Other clinical signs of psoriatic nails
Paronychia due to periungual psoriasis
Acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau
Twenty-nail dystrophy
Psoriatic nail dystrophy
Onycholysis and red dot in lunule Periungual psoriasis and paronychia Trachyonychia
What are the complications of nail psoriasis?
Secondary onychomycosis in the damaged nail plate
Psychosocial effects impacting social relationships and work-related activities
Association with psoriatic arthritis and metabolic syndrome
How is nail psoriasis diagnosed?
Nail psoriasis is usually diagnosed clinically in a patient with psoriatic arthritis and/or cutaneous psoriasis.
The severity of nail psoriasis can be estimated using the Nail Psoriasis Severity Index (NAPSI) in which each nail is divided into quadrants and scored for clinical signs to come up with a numerical score.
Nail clippings for fungal microscopy and culture should be taken as onychomycosis may precede or complicate psoriatic nail dystrophy, and immunosuppressive medications may be used in treatment.
A proximal nail matrix biopsy is occasionally needed to confirm the diagnosis of nail psoriasis, particularly in the absence of signs of psoriasis elsewhere or where only a single nail is affected and a tumour cannot be excluded by other means. Biopsy can lead to permanent nail deformity.
What is the differential diagnosis for nail psoriasis?
Lichen planus of the nail
Parakeratosis pustulosa
What is the treatment for nail psoriasis?
Minimise nail trauma, keep affected nails short
Treat associated onychomycosis first for at least three months
Topical steroids — betamethasone dipropionate, clobetasol propionate
Topical calcipotriol
Topical calcineurin inhibitors
Biological agents for psoriasis — infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept, ustekinumab
Novel small molecules — apremilast, tofacitinib [see Janus kinase inhibitors]
Nonpharmacological treatments
Photodynamic therapy
What is the outcome for nail psoriasis?
Nail psoriasis has a variable response to treatment. The visible response may take weeks or months due to slow growth of the nail plate, and relapses are common.
Psoriatic nail disease can fluctuate in severity over time and can resolve spontaneously.
Alves NCPOP, Moreira TA, Malvino LDS, et al. Onychomycosis in psoriatic patients with nail disorders: aetiological agents and immunosuppressive therapy. Dermatol Res Pract. 2020;2020:7209518.  doi:10.1155/2020/7209518. Journal
Manhart R, Rich P. Nail psoriasis. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015;33(5 Suppl 93):S7–13. Journal
Pasch MC. Nail psoriasis: a review of treatment options. Drugs. 2016;76(6):675–705. doi:10.1007/s40265-016-0564-5. Journal
Schons KR, Knob CF, Murussi N, Beber AA, Neumaier W, Monticielo OA. Nail psoriasis: a review of the literature. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(2):312–17. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142633. PubMed Central
Ventura A, Mazzeo M, Gaziano R, Galluzzo M, Bianchi L, Campione E. New insight into the pathogenesis of nail psoriasis and overview of treatment strategies. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2017;11:2527–35. doi:10.2147/DDDT.S136986. Journal
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Navigating Psoriasis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
MyPsoriasis.co.nz — Information for New Zealand patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis
Nail psoriasis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Napkin Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/napkin-dermatitis]
Napkin dermatitis. Diaper rash. Nappy rash
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Napkin dermatitis — extra information
91487003, 240710003, 402999004, 111188005, 240711004
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Latest update by Dr Jannet Gomez, February 2017.
What is napkin dermatitis?
Who gets napkin dermatitis?
Napkin dermatitis most often affects babies aged 3 to 15 months of age, especially those wearing traditional cloth nappies (50%). It is much less prevalent in babies wearing modern breathable and multilayered disposable nappies.
Napkin dermatitis can also affect older children and adults that are incontinent (see Incontinence-associated dermatitis).
What is the cause of napkin dermatitis?
Urine and occlusion lead to overhydration and skin maceration.
Faecal bile salts and enzymes break down stratum corneum lipids and proteins.
A mixture of urine and faeces creates ammonium hydroxide, raising pH.
The wet skin is colonised by micro-organisms, particularly candida.
Mechanical friction from limb movement may increase discomfort.
Pre-existing skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis or seborrheic dermatitis predispose a baby to napkin dermatitis.
Babies who are breastfed have a lower incidence of napkin dermatitis, as faeces in breastfed babies have a lower pH than in formula-fed babies. As babies start to eat solid foods, the stool frequency and pH start to increase and napkin dermatitis occurs more often.
Other causes of napkin rashes include:
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Acrodermatitis enteropathica-like conditions
Biotin responsive dermatosis
Napkin dermatitis is not due to:
Allergy to the napkins
Toxins in the napkins
Washing powders (unless these are not thoroughly removed by rinsing)
Dermatophyte fungal infections (tinea).
What are the clinical features of napkin dermatitis?
Napkin dermatitis presents as erythematous macules and papules in the genital area that can spread to involve the lower abdomen and thighs.
Chafing: erythema and erosions where the napkin rubs, usually on waistband or thighs.
Granuloma gluteale infantum: red or purple nodules
Candida albicans: erythematous papules and plaques with small satellite spots or superficial pustules.
Impetigo (Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes): irregular blisters and pustules.
Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis: cradle cap and bilateral salmon pink patches, often desquamating, in skin folds.
Atopic dermatitis: bilateral scratched, dry plaques anywhere, but uncommon in the nappy area and family history is common.
Psoriasis: persistent, well-circumscribed, symmetrical, shiny, red, scaly or macerated plaques; other sites may be involved; family history common.
Disseminated secondary eczema or autoeczematisation: rash in distal sites associated with severe napkin rash.
Napkin dermatitis may predispose the infant to urinary tract infection and, in females, to vaginal infection.
Napkin dermatitis Napkin dermatitis thrush Napkin dermatitis
What tests should be done?
What is the treatment for napkin dermatitis?
The need to keep baby dry and use barrier creams should be emphasised. The caregiver should always wash their hands before and after changing a nappy/diaper. Napkin dermatitis is much less common with modern disposable napkins than with cloth nappies.
Are available in different shapes and sizes depending on age and sex
Keep the skin dry and clean
Maintain optimal skin pH
Should be changed when wet or soiled
Contain cellulose pulp and superabsorbent polymers
May include petrolatum-based moisturising lotion to support the skin barrier
Fasteners, backsheets and stretch reduce leakage
Are non-toxic and biologically inert
Do not contain allergens such as natural rubber latex or disperse dyes
Lead to less household exposure to faecal matter.
If using cloth nappies, nappy liners keep the skin dry. Avoid plastic overpants.
Gently clean the baby’s skin with water and a soft cloth
Aqueous cream or another non-soap cleanser can be used if necessary
Pat dry gently and allow to air dry
Apply a protective emollient ointment containing petrolatum and zinc oxide.
Give evening fluids early to reduce wetting at night.
Observe whether certain foods are related to the rash by increasing stool acidity (eg, orange juice) or frequency. If this is the case, discontinue the responsible food, at least temporarily.
Allow nappy-free times.
Prescription treatments
Mild topical steroid such as hydrocortisone cream applied to inflamed skin once or twice daily for 1–2 weeks.
Topical antifungal cream (eg, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, ciclopirox, sertaconazole) once or twice a day if suspicious of Candida albicans infection.
Strong steroid creams should not be applied to a baby's bottom due to potential side effects of striae, tachyphylaxis, and skin thinning.
Non-prescription topical products containing Aloe vera and Calendula officinalis are reportedly effective for napkin dermatitis.
Ravanfar P, Wallace JS, Pace NC. Diaper dermatitis: a review and update. Curr  Opin Pediatr. 2012 Aug;24(4):472-9. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835585f2.  PubMed.
Farahani LA, Ghobadzadeh M, Yousefi P. Comparison of the effect of human milk and topical hydrocortisone 1% on diaper dermatitis. Pediatr Dermatol. 2013 Nov-Dec;30(6):725-9. doi: 10.1111/pde.12118. PubMed.
Murthy SC, Udagani MM, Badakali AV, Yelameli BC. Symptomatic zinc deficiency in a full-term breast-fed infant. Dermatol Online J. 2010 Jun 15;16(6):3. PubMed PMID: 20579458. Journal.
Bonifaz A, Tirado-Sánchez A, Graniel MJ, Mena C, Valencia A, Ponce-Olivera RM. The efficacy and safety of sertaconazole cream (2 %) in diaper dermatitis candidiasis. Mycopathologia. 2013 Apr;175(3-4):249-54. doi: 10.1007/s11046-013-9642-3. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3622746.
Panahi Y, Sharif MR, Sharif A, Beiraghdar F, Zahiri Z, Amirchoopani G, Marzony ET, Sahebkar A. A randomized comparative trial on the therapeutic efficacy of topical aloe vera and Calendula officinalis on diaper dermatitis in children. ScientificWorldJournal. 2012;2012:810234. doi: 10.1100/2012/810234. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3346674.
Adib-Hajbaghery M, Mahmoudi M, Mashaiekhi M. Shampoo-clay heals diaper rash faster than Calendula officinalis. Nurs Midwifery Stud. 2014 Jun;3(2):e14180. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4228529.
Incontinence-associated dermatitis
Granuloma gluteale infantum
Nappy rash — Kidshealth.org
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Necrobiosis Lipoidica]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/necrobiosis-lipoidica]
Necrobiosis lipodica
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Necrobiosis lipoidica — extra information
NLD, Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2006. DermNet Update August 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is necrobiosis lipoidica?
Necrobiosis lipoidica is a rare granulomatous skin disorder typically described on the shin of diabetics.
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Who gets necrobiosis lipoidica?
Necrobiosis lipoidica is three times more common in females than in males, and usually develops in young and middle-aged adults.
1% of patients with diabetes will develop necrobiosis lipoidica.
It can occur in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
11–65% of patients with necrobiosis lipoidica have diabetes or prediabetes.
Diabetes associated with necrobiosis lipoidica can be well controlled or poorly controlled.
Patients with type 1 diabetes are more likely to be younger than those with type 2 diabetes or without diabetes.
Other associations include obesity, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and thyroid disease.
Necrobiosis lipoidica is rare in children.
What is the cause of necrobiosis lipoidica?
The cause of necrobiosis lipoidica is unknown. Theories have included blood vessel changes such as develop in diabetes, or antibody-mediated vasculitis.
What are the clinical features of necrobiosis lipoidica?
Necrobiosis lipoidica begins as a dull red papule or plaque on the shin which slowly enlarges into one or more yellowish-brown patches with a red rim.
Most often occur on both shins and are found in other sites only rarely
May be asymptomatic or tender
May be round, oval, or an irregular shape
Central atrophy - shiny, pale, and thinned, with prominent blood vessels (telangiectasia)
May demonstrate reduced sweating and sensation.
Dermoscopy of necrobiosis lipoidica
Yellow structureless background
Linear vessels with uniform branching
White linear streaks
How does necrobiosis lipoidica present in differing skin types?
In skin of colour, the patches and plaques of necrobiosis lipoidica may be hyperpigmented around the periphery with hypopigmentation developing centrally with the atrophy and telangiectases.
What are the complications of necrobiosis lipoidica?
Ulcers due to necrobiosis lipoidica are at risk of secondary bacterial infection and delayed healing.
Squamous cell carcinoma has been reported to develop in ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica.
Ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica
Necrobiosis lipoidica Ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica Ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica
What is the differential diagnosis of necrobiosis lipoidica?
Elastolytic giant cell granuloma
Necrobiotic xanthogranuloma
How is necrobiosis lipoidica diagnosed?
Necrobiosis lipoidica is diagnosed clinically when typical.
A skin biopsy may be performed to confirm the diagnosis. The histopathology is characteristic; it shows a granulomatous inflammatory reaction around destroyed collagen (necrobiosis). [see Necrobiosis lipoidica pathology].
What is the treatment for necrobiosis lipoidica?
Corticosteroids — topical or intralesional
Photochemotherapy (PUVA).
What is the outlook for necrobiosis lipoidica?
Necrobiosis lipoidica is a chronic condition that may remain stable or slowly progress over years. Spontaneous resolution has been reported.
Peckruhn M, Tittelbach J, Elsner P. Update: treatment of necrobiosis lipoidica. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2017;15(2):151–7. doi:10.1111/ddg.13186. Journal
Shrestha S, Spierings N, Marahatta S. Necrobiosis lipoidica: a case report with dermoscopic review. Clin Case Rep. 2021;9(3):1171–4.  doi:10.1002/ccr3.3713. Journal
Uva L, Freitas J, Soares de Almeida L, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma arising in ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum. Int Wound J. 2015;12(6):741–3. doi:10.1111/iwj.12206. Journal
Yahya H. Necrobiosis lipoidica in a Nigerian woman — report of a case. Niger J Clin Pract. 2019;22(11):1626–8. doi:10.4103/njcp.njcp_40_19. Journal
Necrobiosis lipoidica pathology
Diabetic foot ulcers
Skin signs and systemic disease
Necrobiosis lipoidica — emedicine dermatology ndash; Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Necrobiosis Lipoidica — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Necrotising Fasciitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/necrotising-fasciitis]
Necrotising fasciitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Necrotising fasciitis
Necrotising fasciitis — extra information
Necrotising myositis, Necrotising cellulitis, Flesh eating disease, Haemolytic streptoccal gangrene, Meleney ulcer, Acute dermal gangrene, Hospital gangrene, Suppurative fasciitis, Synergistic necrotising cellulitis
M72.6, I96, A48.0, N49.3
1B71.Z, 1B71.0, 1B71.1, 1B71.2, 1B71.Y, 1C16
52486002, 449900006, 402926000, 722893002, 238309000, 398318005, 4141000119104, 80466000
Necrotising fasciitis
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University London, United Kingdom; Chief Editor: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, February 2016.
What is necrotising fasciitis?
Necrotising fasciitis is a very serious bacterial infection of the soft tissue and fascia. The bacteria multiply and release toxins and enzymes that result in thrombosis in the blood vessels. The result is the destruction of the soft tissues and fascia.
The main types of necrotising fasciitis are:
Type I (polymicrobial ie, more than one bacteria involved)
Type II (due to haemolytic group A streptococcus, and/or staphylococci including methicillin-resistant strains/MRSA)
Type III (gas gangrene eg, due to clostridium)
Other: marine organisms (vibrio species, Aeromonas hydrophila, considered Type III in some reports) and fungal infections (candida and zygomycetes, type IV in some reports).
Type I necrotising fasciitis
Bacteria causing type 1 necrotising fasciitis include Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus, Vibrio and several other aerobic and anaerobic strains (Escherichia coli, Bacteroides fragilis). It is usually seen in older people or in patients affected by diabetes mellitus or other conditions.
Type II necrotising fasciitis
Type II necrotising fasciitis has been sensationalised in the media and is commonly referred to as a flesh-eating disease. It affects all age groups. Healthy people are also prone to infection with this group.
Type III necrotising fasciitis
Type III necrotising fasciitis is caused by Clostridium perfringens or less commonly Clostridium septicum. It usually follows significant injury or surgery and results in gas under the skin: this makes a crackling sound called crepitus. People who inject “black tar” heroin subcutaneously can also be infected with clostridia and develop necrotising fasciitis.
Necrotising fasciitis due to marine organisms is usually due to contamination of wounds by seawater, cuts by fish fins or stingers, or consumption of raw seafood. It occurs more commonly in patients with liver disorders. These infections can be very serious and can be fatal if not attended within 48 hours.
Fungal necrotising fasciitis complicates traumatic wounds in immunocompromised people.
Other terms used for necrotising fasciitis include haemolytic streptococcal gangrene, Meleney ulcer, acute dermal gangrene, hospital gangrene, suppurative fasciitis, and synergistic necrotising cellulitis.
Necrotising fasciitis affecting perineal, genital, and perianal regions is known as Fournier gangrene. This has a particularly high death rate ranging from 15% to 50%.
How do you get necrotising fasciitis?
An opening in the skin that allows bacteria to enter the body. This may occur following minor injury (eg, small cut, graze, pinprick, injection), or a large wound due to trauma or surgery (eg, laparoscopy, sclerotherapy, endoscopic gastrostomy, thoracostomy, Caesarean section, hysterectomy). Sometimes no point of entry can be found.
Cervicofacial necrotising fasciitis can follow mandibular fracture or dental infection.
Particularly invasive strains of bacteria eg, streptococci that evade the immune system and produce a toxin called cysteine protease SpeB, which dissolves tissue.
In children, type II necrotising fasciitis may complicate chickenpox. Other causes of necrotising fasciitis in children include omphalitis, necrotising enterocolitis, and urachal anomalies.
Risks for necrotising fasciitis include:
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Severe chronic illness
Pathophysiology of necrotising fasciitis
The infection starts in the superficial fascia. Enzymes and proteins released by the responsible micro-organisms cause necrosis of fascial layers. Horizontal spread of infection may not be clinically apparent on the skin surface and hence diagnosis may be delayed. The infection then spreads vertically up into the skin and down into deeper structures. Thrombosis occludes the arteries and veins leading to ischaemia and necrosis of the tissues.
Streptococci produce:
M proteins, which initiate an inflammatory response with the release of numerous cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNFα)
Exotoxins, which destroy neutrophils allowing bacterial growth and destroying tissues.
Aerobic and anaerobic bacteria produce hydrogen, nitrogen, and hydrogen sulfide gases that destroy hyaluronic acid enabling the spread of infection.
What are the clinical features of necrotising fasciitis?
Signs and symptoms vary between individuals but often some or all of the following are present.
The most common site of infection is the lower leg. Necrotising fasciitis may also affect upper limb, perineum, buttocks, trunk, head and neck.
Symptoms appear usually within 24 hours of a minor injury.
Pain is often very severe at presentation and worsens over time.
There may be flu-like symptoms, such as nausea, fever, diarrhoea, dizziness and general malaise.
Intense thirst develops as the body becomes dehydrated.
Clinical features after 3 to 4 days
The affected area starts to swell and may show a purplish rash
Large dark marks form that turn into blisters filled with dark fluid
The wound starts to die and area becomes blackened (necrosis)
A fine crackling sensation under the skin (crepitus) is due to gas in the tissues
Severe pain continues until necrosis/gangrene destroys peripheral nerves when the pain subsides
The infection may not improve when antibiotics are given
Metastatic abscesses can develop in liver, lung, spleen, brain, pericardium, and rarely, in the skin.
Necrotising fasciitis Necrotising fasciitis Necrotising fasciitis
How is necrotising fasciitis diagnosed?
A thorough history and clinical examination are crucial in arriving at the diagnosis of necrotising fasciitis. Special care should be taken when examining immunocompromised patients, as the presentation of symptoms/signs may be atypical.
Clostridial and streptococcal infections as a result of traumatic or surgical wound usually manifest quickly compared to necrotising fasciitis due to other organisms.
A positive finger test is highly pathognomic for necrotising fasciitis. A 2–cm vertical incision is made in the affected skin and an index finger is pushed into the tissue. The test is positive if the finger passes through the subcutaneous tissue without resistance.
There is poor adherence of tissue to the fascia on incising the site.
Necrotic tissue/pus oozes out of the fascial planes.
Dishwater-coloured fluid seeps out of the skin.
Typically, necrotising fasciitis does not bleed.
Laboratory screening investigations
White blood cell (WBC) count > 15.4 x 109/L
Serum sodium < 135 mmol/L
Raised C-Reactive Protein (CRP) (> 16 mg/dL)
Raised creatinine kinase (CK) level (> 600 U/L)
Blood culture, deep tissue biopsy [see Necrotising fasciitis pathology], and Gram stain help in identifying the culprit organism(s) and guide the choice of antibiotic. If Staphylococcus aureus is detected, MRSA sensitivity test should be done. Blood cultures are usually negative for clostridial species.
Fungal culture should be performed in immunocompromised and trauma patients.
X-ray, CT scan, and MRI identify areas of fluid collection, inflammation and gas within the soft tissues.
Laboratory risk indicator for necrotising fasciitis
Serum sodium (mmol/L) <135:
Creatinine (umol/L) >141:
Glucose (mmol/L) >10:
What is the treatment for necrotising fasciitis?
Once the diagnosis of necrotising fasciitis is confirmed, treatment should be initiated without delay.
The patient must be hospitalised and is often admitted to an intensive care unit.
The causative organism(s) should be identified and treated with high dose intravenous antibiotics. The initial antibiotic choice includes penicillin, clindamycin, metronidazole, cephalosporins, carbapenems, vancomycin, and linezolid. After the culture is reported, the choice is adjusted.
It is absolutely vital that an experienced surgeon urgently removes all necrotic tissue (debridement).
Supplemental oxygen, fluids, and medicines may be needed to raise blood pressure.
Hyperbaric oxygen and intravenous immunoglobulin may also be considered.
Immediate surgical debridement improves survival and avoids complications of necrotising fasciitis. All infected tissue should be cleared away using adequate excision. Repeated debridements are carried out for a few days.
When the acute infection has subsided, the wound should be closed with skin grafting if required. Vacuum-assisted wound closing devices may be useful to heal a persistent ulcer.
What is the likely outcome?
Prompt diagnosis and treatment are essential to reduce the risk of death and disfigurement from necrotising fasciitis.
If diagnosed and treated early, most patients will survive necrotising fasciitis with minimal scarring. If there is significant tissue loss, later skin grafting will be necessary and in some patients amputation of limbs is required to prevent death.
Up to 25% of patients will die from necrotising fasciitis, due to complications such as renal failure and septicaemia (blood poisoning) and multiorgan failure.
Machado NO. Necrotizing fasciitis: the importance of early diagnosis, prompt surgical debridement and adjuvant therapy. North Am J Med Sci. 2011; 3: 107–18. Journal
Sadasivan J, Maroju NK, Balasubramaniam A. Necrotizing fasciitis. Indian J Plast Surg. 2013;46(3):472–8. doi: 10.4103/0970-0358.121978. Journal
Puvanendran R, Huey JCM, Pasupathy S. Necrotizing fasciitis. Can Fam Physician. 2009;55(10):981–7. Journal
Krieg A, Röhrborn A, Schulte Am Esch J, et al. Necrotizing fasciitis: microbiological characteristics and predictors of postoperative outcome. Eur J Med Res. 2009;14(1):30–6. doi:10.1186/2047-783x-14-1-30. Journal
Misiakos EP, Bagias G, Patapis P, Sotiropoulos D, Kanavidis P, Machairas A. Current concepts in the management of necrotizing fasciitis. Front Surg. 2014;1:36. doi:10.3389/fsurg.2014.00036. Journal
Cheng N-C, Tai H-C, Chang S-C, Chang C-H, Lai H-S. Necrotizing fasciitis in patients with diabetes mellitus: clinical characteristics and risk factors for mortality. BMC Infect Dis. 2015; 15: 417. doi: 10.1186/s12879-015-1144-0. Journal
Hakkarainen TW, Kopari NM, Pham TN, Evans HL. Necrotizing soft tissue infections: review and current concepts in treatment, systems of care, and outcomes. Curr Probl Surg. 2014;51(8):344–62. doi: 10.1067/j.cpsurg.2014.06.001. PubMed Central
Necrotising fasciitis — pathology
Streptococcal skin infections
Bacterial infections online course for health professionals
Blistering skin conditions
Australian box jellyfish stings
Skin infections in people who inject drugs
Bacterial infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Blistering disorders — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Dermatologic manifestations of necrotizing fasciitis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Neonatal Cephalic Pustulosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/neonatal-cephalic-pustulosis]
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis — extra information
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2008. Updated April 2014.
What is neonatal cephalic pustulosis?
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis is a variant of neonatal acne (see acne in children). It is a pustular eruption arising on the face and/or scalp of newborn babies, often during the third week. Unlike true neonatal acne, there are no comedones (blackheads, whiteheads).
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis Neonatal cephalic pustulosis
What is the cause of neonatal cephalic pustulosis?
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis is related to malassezia colonisation, which may be found on mycology (microscopy and culture) of smears from facial pustules.
What is the treatment for neonatal cephalic pustulosis?
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis generally resolves without treatment. However, if the appearance is unsightly, a topical antifungal such as ketoconazole cream can be used safely and may be helpful.
Antoniou C, Dessinioti C, Stratigos AJ, Katsambas AD. Clinical and therapeutic approach to childhood acne: an update. Pediatr Dermatol. 2009 Jul-Aug;26(4):373–80. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2009.00932.x. Review. PubMed PMID: 19689511.
Skin conditions in newborn babies
Blisters and pustules in neonates
Acne and other follicular disorders
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Nicotinamide]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/nicotinamide]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Nicotinamide — extra information
Niacinamide, Nicotinic acid amide, Water soluble B3, Nicomide‑T
173196005, 418279001, 293398007, 329249000. 332376005 |
Author: Anoma Ranaweera, Medical Writer, Auckland, New Zealand, 2012. Latest update by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, March 2018.
Topical nicotinamide
What is nicotinamide?
Nicotinamide, also known as niacinamide or nicotinic acid amide, is the water-soluble, active form of vitamin B3. It has been increasingly studied for many different indications in the field of dermatology, but more research is needed to clarify its value.
Nicotinamide is naturally present in small quantities in yeast, lean meats, fish, nuts and legumes. It is also often added to cereals and other foods. Oral nicotinamide is available as 20–30 mg in multivitamin combinations, and on its own as inexpensive 500-mg tablets. It has also been incorporated in many topical agents including sunscreens and cosmetic agents.
How does nicotinamide work?
The broad clinical effects of nicotinamide may be explained by its role as:
A cellular energy precursor
A modulator of inflammatory cytokines
An inhibitor of the nuclear enzyme poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose [ADP]) polymerase [PARP], which plays a significant role in DNA repair, maintenance of genomic stability, and cellular response to injury including inflammation and apoptosis (cell death).
What is nicotinamide used for?
Vitamin B3 is essential for good health; deficiency leads to a serious illness, pellagra. Oral nicotinamide can be used effectively to treat pellagra.
Nicotinamide used as medicine may benefit the skin in several different ways.
Nicotinamide has anti-inflammatory properties, which may be used for the treatment of bullous (blistering) diseases.
It may improve acne by its anti-inflammatory action and by reducing sebum.
It can improve skin barrier function by decreasing water loss through the epidermis (the outer skin layer) thus increasing skin hydration.
It is reported to improve complexion, by improving the pigmentation, blotchiness and redness of ageing skin; it is used in some cosmeceutical products.
It may reduce actinic keratoses and the risk of skin cancer, particularly squamous cell carcinoma.
It has been used to treat polymorphic light eruption.
Skin conditions treated with nicotinamide
Bullous pemphigoid Acne Squamous cell carcinoma
A combination of oral nicotinamide and tetracycline appears to be a useful alternative to systemic steroids in the treatment of bullous pemphigoid. It is less toxic and safer than dapsone and prednisone.
In at least one open-labeled clinical trial comparing the combination of 500 mg of nicotinamide, three times daily, and 500 mg of tetracycline four times daily, with prednisone, in 20 patients with bullous pemphigoid, there were five complete responses and five partial responses, in the nicotinamide and tetracycline group compared with one complete response and five partial responses in the prednisone group, after 8 weeks of treatment. All five complete- response patients in the nicotinamide and tetracycline group remained disease-free during medication tapering over a 10-month follow-up period, while three patients in the prednisone group had repeated disease flare-ups with steroid tapering during the same period.
Placebo-controlled trials have suggested high-risk sun-damaged patients taking oral nicotinamide who have extensive actinic keratoses and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas may expect a reduction in the number of new lesions over time. The evidence is inconclusive.
Adverse effects of oral nicotinamide
Oral nicotinamide is generally well tolerated in doses under 3 g/day. It does not cause flushing or gastrointestinal upset, unlike its precursor nicotinic acid. It has been reported to increase sweating, to raise blood sugar, and to cause hypotension.Very high doses of nicotinamide may lead to nausea.
Certain nicotinamide metabolites had been linked to an increased risk of major cardiovascular events (MACE). However, a large retrospective cohort study found no increased risk of MACE in patients with nicotinamide exposure.
Topical nicotinamide
Nicotinamide, available in a topical cream, gel and oral forms (eg, Nicomide®), has been shown to be effective in clearing acne. In a controlled clinical trial, 4% nicotinamide gel was found to be as effective as the topical antibiotic 1% clindamycin gel in the treatment of acne vulgaris in 76 patients with moderate acne. The study concluded that the anti-inflammatory properties of nicotinamide might have contributed to its success in acne.
Nicotinamide also reduces facial sebum production. Sebum is responsible for facial shine and contributes to noninflamed comedones and inflammatory acne lesions. Results of a well-controlled clinical trial in Caucasian and Japanese women have shown that application of 2% nicotinamide moisturiser to the face for 4-6 weeks reduces sebum production with significant differences in facial shine and oiliness.
Nicotinamide gel is marketed as an over-the-counter treatment for acne in Canada, Australia, NZ, UK, USA and Ireland. If a twice-daily application causes excessive drying of the skin, one may reduce to once a day, or every other day.
The clinical signs and symptoms of rosacea include increased facial skin dryness, redness and sensitivity. In at least two studies, moisturisers containing nicotinamide have been shown to improve skin barrier function in rosacea patients, leading to diminished reaction to irritants including cleansers and cosmetics.
Anti-ageing skin care
Nicotinamide serves as a precursor of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), which are co-enzymes (facilitators of enzymatic reactions) essential for numerous metabolic pathways. These co-enzymes play a role in the metabolism of glucose, cellular energy production, and synthesis of lipids. The levels of NADH / NADPH (the reduced forms of NAD and NADP) decrease with age and topical nicotinamide appears to reverse the decline.
In multiple clinical studies, topical nicotinamide improved fine lines and wrinkles, hyperpigmented spots, red blotchiness, and skin sallowness (yellowing) as well as elasticity. One study showed nicotinamide to increase the skin's production of ceramides, which are natural emollients and skin protectants, thus improving skin hydration.
A double-blind, placebo-controlled, split-face, left-right, randomised 12-week study in 50 women evaluated the effects of 5% topical nicotinamide on various signs of skin ageing. The researchers reported topical nicotinamide resulted in significant improvement in fine lines/wrinkles, pigmentation, texture and red blotchiness. The study was sponsored by Proctor and Gamble.
Another study of 30 healthy Japanese females reported improvement of eyelid wrinkles after eight weeks of application of a cosmetic containing 4% nicotinamide.
Nicotinamide is well tolerated and often can be used by those who cannot tolerate topical retinoids or fruit acids.
In a randomised controlled clinical trial in 50 patients, 1% nicotinamide gel applied twice daily to the head, forearms and hands for six months reduced the mean number of precancerous actinic keratoses by 28%.
Nicotinamide does not work as a sunscreen (and does not prevent sunburn). It does not have antioxidant properties, but it may affect the complement cascade, cell energy metabolism, and apoptosis (cell death).
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Damian DL, Patterson CRS, Stapelberg M, Park J, Barnetson RS, Halliday GM. UV radiation-induced immunosuppression is greater in men and prevented by topical nicotinamide. J Invest Dermatol 2008; 128: 447–454. PubMed
Damian DL. Nicotinamide for skin cancer chemoprevention. Australas J Dermatol 2017;58:174–80. PubMed.
Kolbach DN, Remme JJ, Bos WH, Jonkman ME, De Jong MCJM, Pas HH, Van Der Meer JB. Bullous pemphigoid successfully controlled by tetracycline and nicotinamide. Br J Dermatol 1995; 133: 88–90. PubMed
Kim B, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Oral nicotinamide and actinic keratosis: a supplement success story. Curr Probl Dermatol 2015; 46: 143–9. DOI: 10.1159/000366550. PubMed
Draelos ZD, Matsubara A, Zhuang J, et al. The effect of 2% niacinamide on facial sebum production. J Cosmet  Laser Ther 2006; 8: 96–101. PubMed
Bissett DL, Oblong JB, Berge CA. Niacinamide: A B vitamin that improves aging facial skin appearance. Dermatol Surg 2005; 31: 860–5. PubMed
Hakozaki T; Minwalla L; Zhuang J, et al. The effect of niacinamide on reducing cutaneous pigmentation and suppression of melanosome transfer. Br J Dermatol 2002; 147: 20–31. PubMed
Surjana D, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide enhances repair of ultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage in human keratinocytes and ex vivo skin. Carcinogenesis 2013; 34: 1144–9. DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgt017. PubMed
Surjana D, Halliday GM, Martin AJ, Moloney FJ, Damian DL. Oral nicotinamide reduces actinic keratoses in phase II double-blinded randomized controlled trials. J Invest Dermatol 2012; 132: 1497–500. Journal.
Gilmore, S. J. (2018), Nicotinamide and skin cancer chemoprevention: The jury is still out. Australas J Dermatol, 59: 6–9. doi:10.1111/ajd.12749. Journal.
Pellagra (deficiency of vitamin B3)
Blistering skin conditions
Niacin and niacinamide (Vitamin B3) — Medline Plus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Nodular Prurigo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/nodular-prurigo]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Nodular prurigo — extra information
Prurigo nodularis, Hydes disease, Pickers nodules
Lesions (benign), Rashes
Last Reviewed: February, 2026
Author: Dr. Rui Baptista Gonçalves, Leeds Teaching Hospitals, United Kingdom. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2022
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is nodular prurigo?
Nodular prurigo (NP) or prurigo nodularis is a chronic skin condition characterised by very itchy firm lumps. It can appear anywhere on the body but is most common on the arms, legs, back, and torso, in a symmetrical distribution.
It is the most severe form of prurigo and thus can be difficult to treat.
Excoriated papules on the arms in nodular prurigo Nodular prurigo on the arms Excoriated prurigo lesions on the legs Pigmentation of prurigo nodules in skin of colour (NP-patient3)Prurigo on the dorsal hands in skin of colour Dome shaped prurigo on the ankles
Who gets nodular prurigo?
Nodular prurigo can affect both sexes and people of all ages but is more common in older adults.
There is also an association with:
Atopy (predisposition to asthma, atopic dermatitis, and hayfever)
Drugs that produce chronic itch such as antimalarials, opioids, and targeted cancer treatments
Internal disease such as:
Chronic kidney disease
What causes nodular prurigo?
The exact cause of prurigo nodularis remains unknown. It is thought to relate to a dysregulation of the nerves as skin biopsies have shown a greater number of nerve cells in the dermis but a reduced amount in the epidermis. There is also an increased number of Merkel cells in the epidermis and the papillary layer of the dermis, as well as more neutrophils and mast cells, thus more cytokine release; which may explain the severe itchiness.
The itchiness may start as a result of an insect bite, stress, dermatitis, or another underlying skin or systemic condition. There is also an association with brachioradial pruritus, which results from traction of spinal nerves in the neck. Scratching will thicken and inflame skin, worsening the condition.
What are the clinical features of nodular prurigo?
Nodular prurigo can vary in severity, from a few to hundreds of lesions of varying size.
Initially, the rash:
Consists of small, red or pink bumps (usually 3–8 mm in diameter)
Has a hyperpigmented border
Is located in easily accessible areas of the body – lateral aspects of the arms and legs, shoulders, chest, and buttocks
Scratching leads to:
Enlargement resulting in a nodular, raised, warty surface
Nodules tend to be firm and small but can measure up to 3 cm in diameter
Older nodules are normally darker and are surrounded by paler, dry skin
Nodules are grouped and follow a symmetrical distribution
Some may ulcerate increasing infection risk
Healed lesions can leave a scar or discolouration
Affected skin may harden and thicken (hyperkeratotic).
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
In darker skin, the lesions tend to be firmer, larger, and darker, similar to bumps on the skin that leave dark spots when healing, which can take longer to fade than in fairer skin types.
What are the complications of nodular prurigo?
Aside from its chronicity, the main complications are:
Automatic scratching behaviour that may develop in the absence of pruritus
How is nodular prurigo diagnosed?
Prurigo nodularis is most often diagnosed clinically, however, investigations are often useful particularly to ascertain the cause. These include:
Skin biopsy — may be useful to confirm diagnosis.
Marked thickening may appear quite abnormal, sometimes resembling squamous cell skin cancer.
Nerve fibres and endings are markedly increased in size.
Increased number of neural mediators known to cause itching and nerve growth.
Direct immunofluorescence — usually negative.
Rarely, the blistering disease bullous pemphigoid can present as nodular prurigo (pemphigoid nodularis). Immunofluorescence reveals immunoglobulins in the BMZ below the epidermis. The prurigo nodules can be present for weeks or months before any blisters appear.
Patch testing — to determine any underlying allergen trigger
Blood tests — including FBC, liver, kidney, and thyroid function HIV tests to determine the presence of underlying systemic disease.
What is the differential diagnosis for nodular prurigo?
Pemphigoid nodularis
Epidermolysis bullosa pruriginosa
Multiple keratoacanthomas
Reactive perforating collagenosis
What is the treatment for nodular prurigo?
Unfortunately, there is no cure and treatment can be challenging. Therapy must be multimodal, also including treatment of any identified underlying condition.
Common treatment options include:
Topical steroid cream or ointment — usually ultrapotent steroid and applied under hydrocolloid dressing or paste bandage occlusion, or steroid impregnated tape
Topical capsaicin and tacrolimus 0.1% ointment for itch
Calcipotriol/betamethasone ointment
Local corticosteroid injection (eg, triamcinolone acetonide 10–40 mg/ml) into the nodules to reduce inflammation
Sedating oral antihistamines
Phototherapy with either UVB or photochemotherapy (PUVA)
Systemic treatment with gabapentin, pregabalin, and naltrexone
Occasionally, antibiotics may be used to treat locally infected skin (cellulitis).
Other treatment options include:
Cryosurgery or excimer lasers have also been used to treat the nodular lesions
In very severe, treatment-resistant lesions, immunosuppressive treatments such as short-course oral steroids, ciclosporin, methotrexate, or azathioprine can be prescribed to help reduce inflammation
Dupilumab (an anti-IL 4 and 13 inhibitor monoclonal antibody used to treat eczema, asthma and chronic rhinosinusitis) has shown efficacy in clearing treatment-resistant NP lesions. Tralokinumab also targets IL 13.
The monoclonal antibody vixarelimab (targets the receptor for cytokines IL-31 and oncostatin M) and nemolizumab are currently being studied as a treatment for NP.
Barzolvolimab, a tyrosine kinase KIT receptor blocker, is also currently being studied.
Promising results seen from an RCT for the treatment of NP with abrocitinib and other JAK inhibitors (eg, povorcitinib).
The opioid receptor modulator, nalbuphine, is currently being investigated.
It is crucial that anyone suffering from NP stops scratching the lesions, as this can make the condition worse. Strategies that can help include:
Keeping your mind busy
Covering the affected area with an occlusive dressing; hydrocolloids generally adhere well
Cooling the affected areas:
Laying a cool flannel on the skin may reduce inflammation and help ease the itching — some people keep flannels in the fridge for this purpose
Keep rooms to a cool temperature
Avoid sleeping with heavy or multiple bedclothes
Avoid wearing clothes made of synthetic fibres — cotton is preferable
Replace soaps or shower/bath gels that may irritate the skin with emollient
Apply emollients at least twice a day, especially if you have dry skin.
What is the outcome for nodular prurigo?
Prurigo nodularis can be difficult to treat, taking months or even years to clear and may not resolve completely, often rendering it a chronic condition. It is important that patients follow their dermatologist’s recommendations and report any issues with the treatment so that different approaches can be used.
Kowalski EH, Kneiber D, Valdebran M, Patel U, Amber KT. Treatment-resistant prurigo nodularis: challenges and solutions. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2019;12:163–172. Published 2019 Feb 28. doi:10.2147/CCID.S188070 Journal
Kwatra SG. Prurigo Nodularis, JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158(3):336. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2021.5307. Journal
Müller S, Bieber T, Ständer S. Therapeutic potential of biologics in prurigo nodularis. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2022;22(1):47–58. doi:10.1080/14712598.2021.1958777. Journal
Müller S, Zeidler C, Ständer S. Chronic Prurigo Including Prurigo Nodularis: New Insights and Treatments. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2024;25(1):15-33. Journal
Mullins TB, Sharma P, Riley CA, Sonthalia S. Prurigo Nodularis. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; September 14, 2021. PubMed
Wieser J, Mercurio M, Somers K. Resolution of treatment-refractory prurigo nodularis with dupilumab: a case series. Cureus. 2020 Jun;12(6):e8737. Journal
Williams KA, Huang AH, Belzberg M, Kwatra SG. Prurigo nodularis: Pathogenesis and management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;83(6):1567–75. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.182. Journal
Pemphigoid nodularis
Nodular Prurigo — British Academy of Dermatology
Prurigo Nodularis — NORD
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Nodulocystic Acne]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/nodulocystic-acne]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Nodulocystic acne — extra information
238745007, 42228007,
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999. Reviewed by Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, February 2014. DermNet Revision August 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is nodulocystic acne?
Nodulocystic acne is a severe form of acne affecting the face and upper trunk, characterised by nodules and cysts that typically resolve with scarring.
Nodulocystic acne of the face and upper trunk
Nodulocystic acne: face  Nodulocystic acne
Who gets nodulocystic acne?
Nodulocystic acne is usually a disorder of adolescence and early adult life seen most commonly in males. However there is a rare juvenile form with onset before 6 years of age, also with a male predominance.
No studies have shown an increased incidence in specific racial groups.
Nodulocystic acne is associated with other follicular occlusion disorders particularly hidradenitis suppurativa.
The acne conglobata variant of nodulocystic acne is the 'A' in a number of syndromes including: SAPHO, PASH, PASS, and PAPA.
What causes nodulocystic acne?
The pathogenesis of acne is believed to be multifactorial involving increased sebaceous gland activity, abnormal keratinisation of follicles, the action of microorganisms, and subsequent inflammation.
Specific risk factors for nodulocystic acne include:
Drugs including anabolic steroids, etanercept, imatinib
Dietary supplements such as whey
What are the clinical features of nodulocystic acne?
Solitary or multiple inflammatory nodules and pseudocysts
Firm, fluctuant, and/or tender
Involvement of the face, neck, and trunk
Nodulocystic acne: cheek Nodulocystic acne: chest Nodulocystic acne: face
What is acne conglobata?
Acne conglobata is a rare severe form of nodulocystic acne. It presents with groups of multiple comedones and inflammatory papules, pustules, and nodules involving the trunk, limbs, and buttocks. Interconnecting abscesses and draining sinuses become secondarily infected causing pain and malodour. Healing is slow, leaving unsightly hypertrophic and atrophic scars. Acne conglobata is often very persistent, lasting into the 30s or 40s.
How does nodulocystic acne present in different skin types?
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and keloid scarring are common complications of nodulocystic acne in skin of colour.
What are the complications of nodulocystic acne?
Psychological effects of acne
Keloid, hypertrophic and atrophic scars
What is the differential diagnosis of nodulocystic acne?
Steatocystoma multiplex
How is nodulocystic acne diagnosed?
Nodulocystic acne is a clinical diagnosis. Hormone studies may be considered in the presence of suggestive clinical features.
What is the treatment for nodulocystic acne?
Topical treatment is usually ineffective for nodulocystic acne.
The recommended treatment is oral isotretinoin which should be commenced early to prevent scarring. Treatment is required for at least five months, and further courses are sometimes necessary. Intralesional steroids following cyst drainage, can be used for individual persistent or large inflammatory nodules or cysts.
Patients with acne conglobata often need additional treatments, such as:
Oral antibiotics for secondary bacterial infection
Systemic corticosteroids to reduce inflammation
Adalimumab, used off-label, for resistant severe disease .
What is the outlook for nodulocystic acne?
Nodulocystic acne typically persist into adult life. Unless treated early and effectively, nodulocystic acne results in scarring particularly on the torso.
Melnik B, Jansen T, Grabbe S. Abuse of anabolic-androgenic steroids and bodybuilding acne: an underestimated health problem. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2007;5(2):110–17. doi:10.1111/j.1610-0387.2007.06176.x. PubMed
Sand FL, Thomsen SF. Adalimumab for the treatment of refractory acne conglobata. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(11):1306–7. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.6678. Journal
Zamil DH, Perez-Sanchez A, Katta R. Acne related to dietary supplements. Dermatol Online J. 2020;26(8):13030/qt9rp7t2p2. Journal
Acne and other follicular disorders
Cutaneous cysts and pseudocysts
Follicular occlusion syndrome
Inflammatory lesions in acne
Psychological effects of acne
Acne Conglobata — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Notalgia Paraesthetica]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/notalgia-paraesthetica]
Notalgia paraesthetica
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Notalgia paraesthetica
Notalgia paraesthetica — extra information
Thoracic nerve entrapment
Notalgia paraesthetica
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998. Updated in July 2016.
What is notalgia paraesthetica?
Notalgia paraesthetica is a form of cutaneous dysaesthesia where itch and/or changed sensation arise in the areas of skin on the medial aspect of the shoulder blade on either side of the back. Notalgia means pain in the back, and paraesthetica refers to burning pain, tingling or itch.
It is also called thoracic cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome.
The skin is itchy without a rash; however, scratching and rubbing can result in secondary changes such as eczema.
What is the cause of notalgia paraesthetica?
The nerves which supply sensation to the upper back emerge from the spinal cord (2nd to 6th thoracic segments) and run a long course up through the thick muscles of the back. They make a right-angled turn before reaching the skin. The nerves appear to be vulnerable to compression or traction. Partial compression or injury leads to the symptoms.
The initial injury to the nerves may include:
Herniated or 'slipped' disc
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Small fibre neuropathy
What are the clinical features of notalgia paraesthetica?
Notalgia paraesthetica often starts after a period of intense exercise leading to muscular stiffness, or a period of inactivity. A specific injury may be recalled.
It is characterised by intense itch (pruritus) on the medial border of one scapula or both, ie, between the shoulder blades. This itch can be intermittent or continuous. It is unrelieved by scratching, although the scratching and rubbing may be pleasurable.
The affected area may spread to both shoulder blades and more widely over the back and shoulders. In many patients, there are no visible signs.
Visible changes often arise from rubbing and scratching the affected area. These include:
Hyperpigmentation (brown marks)
>Hypopigmentation (white marks)
Lichen simplex (a type of eczema)
There may be changed sensation in the affected area of skin, when this is tested for with pinprick, cotton wool or heat and cold. There may be reduced or absent sweating in the affected area.
Scratch marks Hyperpigmentation Scarring
What investigations should be performed in notalgia paraesthetica?
A skin biopsy will be reported as normal unless there is superimposed dermatitis.
What is the treatment of notalgia paraesthetica?
Treatment is not always necessary, and it is not always successful. Typical management may include the following:
Cooling lotions or creams as required (camphor and menthol)
Topical steroids to treat associated lichen simplex
Capsaicin cream – this depletes nerve endings of their chemical transmitters but requires frequent reapplication and causes unpleasant local side effects
Local anaesthetic creams may provide temporary relief of symptoms
Amitriptyline or other oral tricyclic at night to help sleep and counteract neuropathic symptoms
Gabapentin>, pregabalin or other anticonvulsant
Botulinum toxin has been used but a double-blind trial indicated it was not effective
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
Surgical decompression of vertebral nerve impingement
Physical therapy with repetitive exercises and stretches for the upper back has been reported to be effective.
While sitting, cross arms and bend forward to stretch the upper back.
Arms at sides, raise shoulders and rotate them forwards and backwards.
Arms straight, rotate forwards 360 degrees and backwards 360 degrees.
>Rotate upper body left and right until a stretch is felt and hold.
Massage the muscles besides the spine in the affected area.
Samuel Zagarella, Shivam Kapila and Alireza Fallahi. Notalgia paraesthetica: A pilot study of treatment with simple exercises and stretches. Australasian Journal of Dermatology (2016);57:222–24 doi: 10.1111/ajd.12412. PubMed
Savk E, Savk O, Bolukbasi O, Culhaci N, Dikicioğlu E, Karaman G, Sendur N. Notalgia paresthetica: a study on pathogenesis. Int J Dermatol. 2000Oct;39(10):754–9. PubMed
Savk O, Savk E. Investigation of spinal pathology in notalgia paresthetica. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005 Jun;52(6):1085–7. PubMed
Cutaneous dysaesthesia
Brachioradial pruritus
Meralgia paraesthetica
Skin signs of neurological diseases
Notalgia Paresthetica — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Onychogryphosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/onychogryphosis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Onychogryphosis — extra information
Ram's horn nail, Onychogryposis
52897009, 87065009, 402626003
Author: Alvina Nakao, Medical Student, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. September 2019.
Differential diagnoses
What is onychogryphosis?
Onychogryphosis, also known as ram’s horn nail, is a nail disorder resulting from slow nail plate growth. It is characterised by an opaque, yellow-brown thickening of the nail plate with elongation and increased curvature [1,2].
Who gets onychogryphosis?
There have been a few reports of congenital onychogryphosis, and onychogryphosis can be seen in a number of rare genodermatoses.
Acquired onychogryphosis is more common [1]. It is more often observed in older people, people with poor personal care, and patients with senile dementia [1–3].
What causes onychogryphosis?
The exact cause of onychogryphosis is not completely known.
It is associated with:
Skin diseases such as ichthyosis, psoriasis, pemphigus, tertiary syphilis, hyperuricaemia (the cause of gout), and, in the past, smallpox
Poor peripheral circulation, which may be associated with diabetes mellitus
Traumatic injury to the nail bed
Microtrauma due to poorly fitting shoes
Hallux valgus (bunion) [1].
In onychogryphosis, the nail plate becomes hypertrophied and uneven at the proximal matrix (the nail growth plate). The direction of the deformity is determined by which side grows faster, whether due to an insufficiency of the nail matrix under the proximal nail fold or because the nail bed produces a greater quantity of keratin than normal [1].
What are the clinical features of onychogryphosis?
The clinical features of onychogryphosis include:
Involvement of one or both great toenails, but any of the nails can be involved
Opaque, yellow–brown thickening of the nail plate with elongation and increased curvature
What is often described as a ‘ram’s horn’ or ‘oyster-like’ appearance
The nail plate initially growing upwards and deviating in a lateral direction towards the other toes
The nail bed exhibiting an irregular surface marked by striations that are most commonly transverse rather than longitudinal.
What are the complications of onychogryphosis?
The complications of onychogryphosis may include:
Secondary onychomycosis (fungal nail infection)
Subungual gangrene (rarely).
How is onychogryphosis diagnosed?
Onychogryphosis is diagnosed clinically based on its characteristic appearance [1]. In the early stages, it may be difficult to recognise, as the only feature is hypertrophy of the nail plate, and the classical features usually appear in the later stages [1].
On histology, the keratinocytes appear disorderly and there is associated hyperchromatism, parakeratosis, and numerous splits [1].
What is the differential diagnosis for onychogryphosis?
The differential diagnosis for onychogryphosis includes:
Congenital malalignment of toenails (where the nail plate is laterally deviated and not parallel to the major axis of the distal phalanx, in infancy or childhood) [4]
Pachyonychia congenita, in which the fingernails are more commonly affected, and the thickened nail has a brownish discolouration (molecular genetic studies can be done to detect mutations in keratin genes KRT6a and KRT16)
Onychomycosis, which can co-exist with onychogryphosis (nail clippings should be undertaken to culture dermatophyte fungus, yeast, or mould) [5].
What is the treatment for onychogryphosis?
Treatment for onychogryphosis can be either conservative or operative, depending on its cause and symptoms [1].
Excessive pressure or microtrauma to the nail bed can be minimised by selecting properly fitted footwear [1].
Conservative treatment involves:
Regular use of an electric drill, bur, or mechanical debridement with a nail clipper to shorten the nail and remove subungual hyperkeratosis
Cryotherapy prior to debridement will soften the nail plate so it is easier to cut
Blunt dissection with a nail clipper after medical nail avulsion with either 40% urea or 50% potassium iodide [1].
If conservative treatment fails, nail avulsion may be considered followed by ablative or excisional matricectomy (surgically or chemically removing the proximal nail matrix at the base of the nail) [1].
Excisional techniques include scalpel excision, cutting electrosurgery, or laser in cutting mode [1].
Ablative techniques include chemical cautery, electrosurgery, or laser in ablative mode [1].
The Zadik technique or a V–Y advancement flap can be used to completely remove the nail matrix [1]. The Syme method, whereby half of the terminal phalanx is removed with the nail fold, is rarely used [1].
What is the outcome for onychogryphosis?
Onychogryphosis tends to recur after conservative treatment [1]. For both clinical and cosmetic purposes, treatment can be repeated to keep the nail bed short and prevent secondary complications. The use of proper footwear to prevent excessive nail pressure on the nail bed is important.
Ko D, Lipner SR. Onychogryphosis: case report and review of the literature. Skin Appendage Disord 2018; 4: 326–330. doi: 10.1159/000485854. PubMed
Chang P. Onychogryphosis. Our Dermatology Online 2011; 2: 227–8. Journal
Cataflo P, Musumec ML, Lacarrubba F, Dinotta F, Micali G. Congenital malalignment of the great toenails: a review. Skin Appendage Disord 2018; 4: 230–5. DOI: 10.1159/000484943. PubMed
Singh G. Nails in systemic disease. Indian J Dermat Venereol Leprol 2011; 77: 646–51. DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.86472. Journal
Fungal nail infections
Medical nail avulsion
Pachyonychia congenita
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Onycholysis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/onycholysis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Onycholysis — extra information
Separation of nail plate, Detachment of nail plate
EE10.2, EA90.51, EH73, EH75, EC22.0
75789001, 95342006, 238607003, 403286002, 403301006, 726475009, 726476005, 403108008
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated: Dr Fleur Weiqian Kong, Honorary Dermatology Registrar, Mater Adult Hospital, Brisbane QLD, Australia; Dr James Muir, Dermatologist, Mater Adult Hospital, Brisbane QLD, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. December 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is onycholysis?
Onycholysis is a common nail disorder in which the nail plate has separated from the nailbed typically resulting in a well-defined area of white opaque nail. It may be idiopathic or secondary to trauma, skin disease, nail infections, tumours, or systemic events. Photo-onycholysis is due to ingestion of a photosensitiser, such as a medication [see Drug-induced photosensitivity].
Idiopathic causes Photo-onycholysis
Who gets onycholysis?
Onycholysis can affect both sexes, all ages and races. It is most frequently seen in adult women.
What causes onycholysis?
Onycholysis can be primary (idiopathic, unknown cause) or secondary to one of many causes. Some examples are listed in Table 1.
Repetitive trauma, including manicure Prolonged immersion in water Chemical exposure including nail cosmetics Foreign body implantation
Psoriasis Hand dermatitis Lichen planus
Dermatophytes and yeasts eg, T. rubrum, C. albicans Scabies
Endocrine eg, hypo- and hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, pregnancy Infiltrative eg, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis Malignancy eg, multiple myeloma, Sezary syndrome Photosensitivity eg, porphyrias Yellow nail syndrome
Drug-induced photosensitivity eg, antibiotics including tetracyclines, NSAIDs, psoralens, and oral retinoids Chemotherapeutic agents eg, taxanes
Hereditary distal onycholysis (MIM 164800)
What are the clinical features of onycholysis?
Onycholysis can affect a single nail or multiple fingernails and/or toenails. The distal part of the nail is most commonly affected lifting the free edge; sometimes the nail may detach laterally or proximally. Oil spot sign is an island of onycholysis under a nail.
Clinical features can include the following signs.
An irregular but sharply defined border between the pink portion of the nail and the white edge of the lifted detached nail.
The detached nail is usually white and opaque compared to the transparent normal nail that appears pink.
Lateral/proximal onycholysis and oil spot sign are a yellow-pink colour rather than white.
The nail surface may be normal or pitted, indented, or crumbly.
Thickened hyperkeratotic skin may accumulate under the detached nail.
Subungual haemorrhage can occur in acute-onset onycholysis.
Onycholysis is usually painless, but may be painful if acute or inflammatory.
Psoriatic onycholysis Nail lichen planus: onycholysis seen in 3rd and 5th fingernails Onycholysis in psoriatic nail dystrophy
What are the complications of onycholysis?
Onycholysis predisposes to secondary infection under the nail, most commonly with Candida albicans and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, resulting in discolouration of the nail.
Onycholysis can be cosmetically unacceptable, especially for people who work with their hands in public view.
Candida infection and onycholysis C. albicans infection and onycholysis Pseudomonas infection and onycholysis
How is onycholysis diagnosed?
Onycholysis is a clinical diagnosis with the cause often obvious on history and examination. Investigations may be required if the cause is not apparent.
Nail clippings or scrapings for bacterial and/or fungal culture [see Laboratory tests for bacterial infections, Laboratory tests for fungal infection]
Blood tests for systemic causes of nail disease, such as thyroid function tests.
What is the differential diagnosis for onycholysis?
Onycholysis may persist or progress due to:
Continued excessive nail trauma, such as cleaning under the nail with a file
Continued ingestion of a photosensitising drug, complimentary medicine, or food
Subungual squamous cell carcinoma
Melanoma of the nail unit.
Onycholysis should be distinguished from leukonychia (white nail), including Terry nail, in which the nail remains attached but appears white and opaque.
What is the treatment for onycholysis?
The detached portion of the nail will not reattach. The aim of treatment is for the new nail growth to remain attached to the underlying nailbed.
Clip the affected portion of the nail and keep the nail(s) short with frequent trimming.
Minimise activities that traumatise the nail and nailbed.
Avoid potential irritants such as nail enamel, enamel remover, solvents, and detergents.
Wear gloves, including light cotton gloves under vinyl gloves for wet work.
Tape nail to the underlying digit.
Use of antimicrobial soaks, such as dilute vinegar, to minimise the risk of secondary infection.
Specific treatment of onycholysis depends on the cause. This may mean ceasing or changing a medication, specific treatment of a nail infection, or appropriate treatment for an associated systemic condition or dermatosis.
What is the outcome for onycholysis?
Onycholysis of short duration and of known origin can recover with appropriate treatment. Fingernails take 4–6 months to fully regrow; toenails take twice as long. The longer onycholysis persists the less likely new nail growth will reattach due to permanent damage (cornification) of the underlying nailbed (‘disappearing nailbed’).
Bazex J, Baran R, Monbrun F, Grigorieff-Larrue N, Marguery MC. Hereditary distal onycholysis--a case report. Clin Exp Dermatol 1990;15(2):146–8. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2230.1990.tb02054.x. PubMed
Byrne JP, Boss JM, Dawber RP. Contraceptive pill-induced porphyria cutanea tarda presenting with onycholysis of the finger nails. Postgrad Med J. 1976;52(610):535–8. doi:10.1136/pgmj.52.610.535. PubMed Central
Chiriac A, Brzezinski P, Foia L, Marincu I. Chloronychia: green nail syndrome caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in elderly persons. Clin Interv Aging. 2015;10:265–7. doi:10.2147/CIA.S75525. PubMed Central
Damasco FM, Geskin LJ, Akilov OE. Nail changes in Sézary syndrome: a single-center study and review of the literature. J Cutan Med Surg. 2019;23(4):380–7. doi:10.1177/1203475419839937. PubMed
Daniel CR 3rd, Iorizzo M, Piraccini BM, Tosti A. Simple onycholysis. Cutis. 2011;87(5):226–8. PubMed
De Berker DAR, Richert B, Baran R. Acquired disorders of the nails and nail unit. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn. Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 95.9–10.
Erpolat S, Eser A, Kaygusuz I, Balci H, Kosus A, Kosus N. Nail alterations during pregnancy: a clinical study. Int J Dermatol. 2016;55(10):1172–5. doi:10.1111/ijd.13316. PubMed
Hay RJ, Baran R, Moore MK, Wilkinson JD. Candida onychomycosis--an evaluation of the role of Candida species in nail disease. Br J Dermatol. 1988;118(1):47–58. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.1988.tb01749.x.
Huang KL, Lin KY, Huang TW, et al. Prophylactic management for taxane-induced nail toxicity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2019;28(5):e13118. doi:10.1111/ecc.13118. PubMed
Tempark T, Lekwuttikarn R, Chatproedprai S, Wananukul S. Nail scabies: an unusual presentation often overlooked and mistreated. J Trop Pediatr 2017;63(2):155–9. doi:10.1093/tropej/fmw058. PubMed
Zaias N, Escovar SX, Zaiac MN. Finger and toenail onycholysis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(5):848–53. doi:10.1111/jdv.12862. PubMed
Psoriatic onycholysis case 1
Drug-induced nail disease
Drug-induced photosensitivity
Fungal nail infections
Onycholysis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Onychopapilloma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/onychopapilloma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Onychopapilloma — extra information
Longitudinal erythronychia, Nail–producing papilloma
Author: Dr Diana Purvis, Dermatologist, Starship Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand; Chief Editor: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, December 2016. Minor update by Ian Coulson, Dermatologist. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2024.
Differential diagnoses
What is onychopapilloma?
Onychopapilloma is a benign neoplasm of the nail matrix. It is usually an isolated lesion affecting one nail. Multiple nail involvement is rare and may be a sign of a BAP1 tumour predisposition syndrome. Rarely malignant onychopapilloma may occur with a histology of Bowen’s disease.
Who gets onychopapilloma?
Onychopapiloma is rare. It can affect males and females of all races and ethnicities. It has mainly been described in middle-aged and older adults.
What causes onychopapilloma?
The cause of onychopapilloma is unknown. Multiple polydactylous lesions have been associated with the BAP1 tumour predisposition syndrome. In this situation individuals have a higher risk of multiple Spitz tumours, ocular and cutaneous melanoma, clear cell carcinoma of the kidney and mesothelioma.
What are the clinical features of onychopapilloma?
Onychopapilloma usually results in a longitudinal streak in a red nail (erythronychia), which extends from the lunula to the tip of the nail.
White longitudinal streaks (leukonychia) or brown longitudinal streaks (melanonychia) may also occur.
The distal tip of the nail may split or lift (onycholysis).
A warty growth may be evident under the nail (subungual keratosis).
Splinter haemorrhage (linear streak of blood under the nail) is common.
Dermoscopy of the free edge of the nail plate shows a small area of subungual scale.
Erythronychia, onycholysis Splinter haemorrhages Melanonychia Erythronychia Dermoscopy Subungual hyperkeratosis
How is onychopapilloma diagnosed?
The diagnosis may be suspected clinically, but as malignant lesions under the nail could look similar, it is important to keep the lesion under review and undertake nail biopsy if there is an enlarging lesion.
Histology of a nail clipping showing an area of asymmetrical dyskeratosis and papillomatosis.
Longitudinal biopsy of the nail shows a papillomatous nail bed with layers of hyperkeratosis and an absent granular layer. Pigmentation if present, is due to melanocyte activation.
What is the differential diagnosis for onychopapilloma?
The differential diagnosis for onychopapilloma includes:
Darier disease (usually this affects multiple nails)
Another benign growth (eg, naevus, glomus tumour)
Cancer (eg, squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma of the nail unit).
Malignant onychopapilloma - widening of the longitudinal band and pain may alert to this entity.
What is the treatment for onychopapilloma?
Longitudinal excision of the entire affected nail and proximal nail matrix is curative.
What is the outcome for onychopapilloma?
Untreated, the lesion tends to persist.
Min, JungChae, Seoung WanLee, Ga-Young et al. Case of onychopapilloma presenting as longitudinal melanonychia. Dermatologica Sinica, Volume 0, Issue 0. Full text.
Baran R, Perrin C. Longitudinal erythronychia with distal subungual keratosis: onychopapilloma of the nail bed and Bowen's disease. Br J Dermatol. 2000 Jul;143(1):132–5. PubMed PMID: 10886147. PubMed.
Lebensohn A, Ghafoor A, Bloomquist L, et al. Multiple Onychopapillomas and BAP1 Tumor Predisposition Syndrome. JAMA Dermatol. Published online May 17, 2024. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.1804. PubMed
Haneke E, Iorizzo M, Gabutti M, Beltraminelli H. Malignant onychopapilloma. J Cutan Pathol. 2021;48(1):174–9. PubMed
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Oral Antifungal Medication]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/oral-antifungal-medication]
Oral antifungal medications
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Oral antifungal medication
Oral antifungal medication — extra information
Infections, Diagnosis and testing
718526003, 373219008, 373236000, 373450007, 372807004, 387532006, 387174006, 387216007
Diagnosis and testing
Oral antifungal medication
Medication for candida and dermatophyte infections (azoles)
Medications only for candida infections
Medications only for dermatophyte infections
Antifungal drug resistance
Oral antifungal medications may be required for fungal infection if:
It is extensive or severe.
It resists topical antifungal therapy.
It affects hair-bearing areas (tinea capitis and tinea barbae).
The choice of oral antifungal medication, its dose and the duration of treatment depend on:
The type of fungus i.e. candida, dermatophyte (tinea), malassezia, or mould.
The site affected i.e. skin, mucosa, nails.
Other co-existing diseases.
Interactions with other medications.
Medication for both candida and dermatophyte infections (azoles)
The trade names of the medications sold in New Zealand are given in parentheses.
Itraconazole (Sporanox® capsules).
Ketoconazole (Nizoral® tablets).
Fluconazole (Diflucan® capsules).
Voriconazole (Vfend® tablets) and posaconazole are reserved for serious invasive Candida and mould infections.
Some species of candida are resistant to azoles, and azole resistance is increasing especially in immunosuppressed patients who are prescribed long courses.
Medications only suitable for candida infections
Nystatin (Mycostatin®, Nilstat®), a polyene. This is not absorbed into the bloodstream through the gut.
Flucytosine (Alcobon® infusion), usually used with amphotericin. It can cause bone marrow depression.
Amphotericin B (Ambisome® injection; Fungizone® infusion), a polyene. This is not absorbed into the bloodstream through the gut.
Caspofungin, anidulafungin and micafungin (echinocandins)
Medications only suitable for dermatophyte infections
Griseofulvin (no longer available in New Zealand), derived from Penicillium
Terbinafine (Lamisil®, Terbafin® tablets), an allylamine.
Antifungal drug resistance
In recent years, both topical and oral allylamine and triazole antifungal drug resistance has become a problem, particularly in the Indian subcontinent.
Extensive therapy-resistant dermatophyte infection should prompt this as a possible problem. Where available, fungal culture and estimation of drug minimum inhibitory concentration determined to guide appropriate medication
For more information, see antifungal drug resistance.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children(BNFC).
Introduction to fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Topical antifungal medications
Antifungal drug resistance
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements — MedlinePlus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Oral Candidiasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/oral-candidiasis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Oral candidiasis — extra information
Oral thrush, Oral Candida infection, Oral candidosis
79740000, 746223008, 235071003, 402998007, 235070002, 707318002, 234568006, 402997002, 402996006, 235069003, 278521000, 7522008
Created 2003 by Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Latest update by Dr Jannet Gomez, March 2017. DermNet Revision October 2021
What is oral candidiasis?
Oral candidiasis is a fungal infection of the mouth often called 'thrush' because its white spots resemble the breast of the bird with the same name.
Although candida is present in 50% of the normal flora of healthy mouths, it causes infection (candidiasis) when increased numbers of yeast cells invade the mucosa.
Who gets oral candidiasis?
Risk factors for developing oral candidiasis include:
In a newborn baby, maternal vaginal yeast infection
Serious underlying diseases, such as cancer, primary immunodeficiency or infection with human immunodeficiency virus
Candida infection elsewhere eg, in an infant, napkin dermatitis
Dry mouth due to disease of the salivary glands or medications, eg antihistamines, diuretics
Dentures, especially if they are not regularly cleaned or fit badly
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Nutritional deficiency, for example, iron or B-vitamin deficiency
Inhaled corticosteroids used to treat asthma, such as beclometasone, budesonide, fluticasone.
Oropharyngeal candidiasis is reported in hospitalised and asymptomatic COVID-19 patients.
What causes oral candidiasis?
The usual organism is Candida albicans, but at least seven other species of Candida can also cause oral candidiasis including C. tropicalis, C. glabrata, C. kruesi, and others. C. dubliniensis is also reported in HIV patients. See Non-albicans candida infections.
Oral thrush Oral candidiasis Angular cheilitis
What are the clinical features of oral candidiasis?
Candida may arise suddenly as an acute infection or persist for long periods as a chronic infection.
Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis.
There are white patches on gums, tongue and inside the mouth that can be peeled off leaving a raw area.
Acute atrophic candidiasis.
There are smooth red shiny patches on the tongue. The mouth is very sore.
Chronic atrophic candidiasis.
This is common in those with dentures. The underlying mucosa is red and swollen.
There are sore red splits at each side of the mouth, more likely if there is an overhang of the upper lip over the lower lip causing a moist deep furrow. Angular cheilitis due to candida and/or Staphylococcus aureus arises frequently in those taking the medication isotretinoin for acne; this medication dries the lips.
Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis.
This is a type of oral leukoplakia (white patch) inside the cheeks or on the tongue with persistent nodules or lumps. It usually affects smokers and is pre-malignant. Red patches (erythroplakia), as well as white patches, may indicate malignant change.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Presents as a chronic pseudomembranous oral infection. The skin and nails are also affected.
Median rhomboid glossitis
Diamond-shaped inflammation at the back of the tongue.
Candida can cause a secondary infection of other oral mucosal conditions such as lichen planus or geographic tongue.
Severe infections may extend down the throat (oesophageal infection) and cause difficulty with swallowing.
How is oral candidiasis diagnosed?
Microscopy and culture of skin swabs and scrapings aid in the diagnosis of candidal infections. However, as candida can live on a mucosal surface quite harmlessly, clinical correlation is required. It may also secondarily infect an underlying disorder.
In extensive oral candidiasis, endoscopy is performed to see the extent of the lesions into the gastrointestinal tract.
How is oral candidiasis treated?
General measures including prevention
Practice good oral hygiene.
Brush teeth regularly.
Use warm saline water as a mouth wash.
Avoid use/overuse of antiseptic mouthwashes, as they alter the flora of the mouth.
If using a steroid inhaler for asthma, drink water and rinse mouth after inhalation.
Clean dentures with an anti-candidal preparation, such as 1% sodium hypochlorite solution.
Remove dentures overnight.
Mouthwashes with anti-candidal activity include:
Chlorhexidine gluconate
Essential oil formulations.
Topical antifungal products for oral candidiasis include:
Oral nystatin suspension (1 ml 4 times daily), or pastilles (for denture stomatitis)
Amphotericin B (5 ml or 1 10-mg lozenge 4 times daily)
Miconazole gel (2.5 ml after food 4 times daily).
Treatment should be continued for 1–4 weeks or until symptoms have been clear for 7 days.
Systemic treatments include:
Fluconazole 100­–150 mg daily for 10 days (especially for pseudomembranous infection)
Hellstein JW, Marek CL. Candidiasis: red and white manifestations in the oral cavity. Head Neck Pathol. 2019;13(1):25–32. doi:10.1007/s12105-019-01004-6 PubMed Central
Kinkela Devcic M, Simonic-Kocijan S, Prpic J, et al. Oral candidal colonization in patients with different prosthetic appliances. J Fungi (Basel). 2021;7(8):662. doi:10.3390/jof7080662. Journal
Rajendra Santosh AB, Muddana K, Bakki SR. Fungal infections of oral cavity: diagnosis, management, and association with COVID-19. SN Compr Clin Med. 2021;1–12. doi:10.1007/s42399-021-00873-9. PubMed Central
Non-albicans candida infections
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Vulvovaginal candidiasis
Candidiasis, Mucosal — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Oral Irritated Fibroma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/oral-irritated-fibroma]
Oral (irritated) fibroma
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Oral irritated fibroma
Oral irritated fibroma — extra information
Traumatic oral fibroma, Focal intraoral fibrous hyperplasia, Oral polyp, Fibroepithelial polyp of oral mucosa, Irritative hyperplasia of oral mucosa, Oral fibroepithelial polyp
D10.1, K14, K13.70, K13.6, K06.2
Oral irritated fibroma
Author: Dr Delwyn Dyall-Smith FACD, Dermatologist, 2010.
What is oral (irritated) fibroma?
An oral fibroma is a common benign scar-like reaction to persistent long-standing irritation in the mouth. It is also known as a traumatic fibroma, focal intraoral fibrous hyperplasia, fibrous nodule or oral polyp.
Oral fibroma, gum Oral irritated fibroma, maxillary labial frenulum
Who gets an oral fibroma?
An oral fibroma is most commonly seen in older adults but can occur at any age. It affects 1–2% of adults.
It is usually due to chronic irritation such as:
Rubbing from a rough tooth
Dentures or other dental prostheses.
What are the clinical features of an oral fibroma?
An oral fibroma presents as a firm smooth papule in the mouth. It is usually the same colour as the rest of the mouth lining but is sometimes paler or, if it has bled, may look a dark colour. The surface may be ulcerated due to trauma, or become rough and scaly. It is usually dome-shaped but may be on a short stalk like a polyp (pedunculated). If it has developed under a denture it may be flat with a leaf-like shape.
The commonest location for an oral fibroma is on the inside of the cheek where the upper and lower teeth meet. Other common sites include the sides of the tongue, gums and inside the lower lip.
An oral fibroma is usually a solitary lesion. When there are many lesions, associated diagnoses need to be considered including tuberous sclerosis, Cowden syndrome, familial fibromatosis and fibrotic papillary hyperplasia of the palate.
Oral fibromas do not develop into oral cancer.
Oral irritated fibroma due to ill-fitting dentures
Oral irritated fibroma, maxillary labial frenulum Oral irritated fibroma, hard palate Oral irritated fibroma, hard palate
In addition to the irritation fibroma, there are a number of other well-recognised types of oral fibroma:
Myofibroma and myofibromatosis
Peripheral ossifying fibroma
Peripheral odontogenic fibroma
How is oral fibroma diagnosed?
The diagnosis of oral fibroma will be suspected clinically when there are the usual history and examination findings. A biopsy may be taken to exclude other conditions or to remove the lesion. Histology shows typical dense fibrous tissue with relatively few cells. The overlying epithelium may be ulcerated, thinned or thickened.
What is the treatment of oral fibroma?
When treatment is required, the only option is surgical excision of the fibroma with narrow margins. It may recur after surgery if the source of irritation continues. It is therefore also important to manage the source of the irritation. Oral fibromas do not disappear without treatment.
Gonsalves WC, Chi AA, Neville BW. Common oral lesions: Part II. Masses and neoplasia. Am Fam Physician 2007;75: 509–12.
Lederman DA, Fornatora ML: Oral fibromas and fibromatoses – Medscape Reference
Stoopler ET, Alawi F. Clinicopathologic challenge: a solitary submucosal mass of the oral cavity. Int J Dermatol 2008; 47: 329–31. PubMed
Peripheral ossifying fibroma
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Oral Lichen Planus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/oral-lichen-planus]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Oral lichen planus — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
L43.9, D89.811, L43.8
EA91.4, EA91.40, EA91.41, EA91.42, EA91.4Y
235049008, 238665009, 718068005, 238664008, 24511006, 238666005, 238667001, 238662007, 238663002, 707249009, 703133002, 402247009
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Author: Kim Gear, Oral Medicine Trainee, Auckland, New Zealand, 2007. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. January 2018. Minor amendment by Ian Coulson. July 2024.
What is oral lichen planus?
Oral lichen planus is lichen planus inside the mouth. Lichen planus is a chronic inflammatory skin condition.
Reticular lichen planus Erosive lichen planus Plaque lichen planus
Who gets oral lichen planus?
Oral lichen planus affects 50% of patients with cutaneous lichen planus but may occur without skin lesions elsewhere.
What is the cause of oral lichen planus?
The precise cause of oral lichen planus is not fully understood. It involves cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes and pro-inflammatory cytokines, which attack the oral epithelial cells — resulting in their death. The immune response is mediated by antigen-specific cells.
Drugs — this is called oral lichenoid drug reaction. It is most often due to gold therapy. Other medications include some antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antimalarials, drugs used for treating hypertension and heart disease, and antiretroviral medicines. These drugs more commonly cause a lichenoid skin eruption, with the mouth being affected less often.
Viral infection, particularly Hepatitis C
Oral lichenoid lesions are also part of the spectrum of chronic graft-versus-host disease that occurs after bone marrow transplantation.
Studies have demonstrated a lower serum vitamin D level in those with oral lichen planus compared to control groups.
Lichenoid drug reaction Lichenoid reaction to amalgam Graft versus host disease
What are the clinical features of oral lichen planus?
Oral lichen planus can affect any or all areas inside the mouth. It can be precipitated by psychosocial stress or by local mechanical trauma.
Oral lichen planus may present in the following forms, and is often of mixed types.
Reticular lichen planus
Symmetrical white lace-like pattern on buccal mucosa (inner aspects of cheeks)
There may be no symptoms or discomfort and soreness.
May affect tongue or gums
Atrophic/erosive lichen planus
Red lesions often with a whitish border
My cause erosions (superficial ulceration)
Most often affects the gums (gingiva) and lips
May be associated with erosive lichen planus affecting genital sites
Plaque type oral lichen planus
Usually seen in smokers
Confluent white patches similar to oral keratoses
Reticular pattern Erosive pattern Plaque pattern
How is the diagnosis of oral lichen planus made?
Under the microscope, the pathologist may observe a characteristic lichenoid reaction. Direct immunofluorescence may reveal positive staining for fibrinogen, immunoglobulins and complement.
Biopsy is often performed to rule out oral cancer.
What are the complications of oral lichen planus?
Oral lichen planus can be very painful and ulceration may lead to scarring. Sometimes eating is so uncomfortable that the affected person is unable to maintain adequate nutrition.
Lichen planus, particularly the erosive form, may rarely lead to oral cancer (squamous cell carcinoma). Persistent ulcers and enlarging nodules should undergo biopsy.
Oral lichen planus and squamous cell carcinoma
Management of oral lichen planus
Most people get satisfactory control of symptoms with the following measures.
Meticulous oral hygiene: brushing teeth and gums, regular visits to dentist, once-weekly mouthwash with diluted chlorhexidine or benzydamine
If standard toothpaste irritates, try products that do not contain sodium lauryl sulphate
Vitamin D supplementation (if indicated)
Topical chamomile gel
Topical anaesthetic gel
Topical retinoid, for example tretinoin or isotretinoin gel
Topical steroids as drops, pastes, gels or sprays, for example, triamcinolone in an emollient dental paste, fluticasone nasal preparations, and clobetasol propionate in various forms. Topical steroids can be delivered to oral lichen planus affecting the gums within a polyvinyl siloxane medication tray, held in place for a couple of hours.
Steroid injections (intralesional triamcinolone)
Mouth rinse containing dexamethasone (1 mg dissolved in 10 ml warm water) or a calcineurin inhibitor (ciclosporin or tacrolimus); this is spat out afterwards.
Other possible therapeutic agents may include:
Systemic retinoids (acitretin or isotretinoin) - in a randomised trial, adding acitretin to topical steroids affected significant improvement
Low molecular weight heparin.
Targeted molecular medicines are under investigation for the treatment or recalcitrant disease, with apremilast reported effective in a few patients.
What is the outcome of lichen planus?
The prognosis for oral lichen planus is uncertain. It can clear up within a few months or persist (with or without treatment) for decades. There are often periods of remission and relapse.
Lopez Jornet, P. and Aznar-Cayuela, C. (2016), Efficacy of topical chamomile management vs. placebo in patients with oral lichen planus: a randomized double-blind study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol, 30: 1783–1786. doi:10.1111/jdv.13770. Journal.
Bettencourt M. Oral Lichen Planus Treated With Apremilast. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016 Aug 1;15(8):1026–8. PubMed PMID: 27538007. PubMed.
Singh AR, Rai A, Aftab M, Jain S, Singh M. Efficacy of steroidal vs non-steroidal agents in oral lichen planus: a randomised, open-label study. J Laryngol Otol. 2017 Jan;131(1):69–76. Epub 2016 Dec 5. PubMed PMID: 27917729. PubMed.
Nogueira PA, Carneiro S, Ramos-e-Silva M. Oral lichen planus: an update on its pathogenesis. Int J Dermatol. 2015 Sep;54(9):1005–10. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12918. Epub 2015 Jul 3. Review. PubMed PMID: 26147778. PubMed.
Krupaa RJ, Sankari SL, Masthan KM, Rajesh E. Oral lichen planus: An overview.  J Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2015 Apr;7(Suppl 1):S158–61. doi: 10.4103/0975-7406.155873. Review. PubMed PMID: 26015696; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4439656. PubMed Central.
Saeed S, Choudhury P, Ahmad SA, et al. Vitamin D in the Treatment of Oral Lichen Planus: A Systematic Review. Biomedicines. 2022;10(11):2964. Published 2022 Nov 17. doi:10.3390/biomedicines10112964 PubMed
Vinay K, Kumar S, Dev A, et al. Oral Acitretin Plus Topical Triamcinolone vs Topical Triamcinolone Monotherapy in Patients With Symptomatic Oral Lichen Planus: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2024;160(1):80–7. PubMed
Lichenoid drug eruption
Lichenoid amalgam reaction
Oral lichenoid drug eruption
Erosive lichen planus
Gingivitis and periodontitis
Antimalarial medications in dermatology
Plasma cell mucositis
Oral Lichen Planus — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Orf]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/orf]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Orf — extra information
Orf virus infection, Contagious pustular dermatitis, Contagious ovine ecthyma, Ecthyma contagiosum, Bovine pustular stomatitis, Contagious pustular stomatitis, Contagious ecthyma of sheep
74050005, 64753004, 70275008, 762375006, 58767000
Author: Mark Duffill, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2001. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, November 2017.
Orf in sheep and goats
Orf is a zoonotic viral skin infection that is contracted from sheep and goats. It is caused by the parapox virus, a large DNA virus that replicates in cellular cytoplasm.
Orf in sheep and goats
Human lesions are caused by direct inoculation of infected material, often through an existing scratch or cut.
Orf is a risk for sheep farmers, shearers, freezing workers, or anyone that bottle-feeds a lamb. Children may also acquire it from playing on infected pasture or in a sheep shed. Butchers, meat porters and housewives are sometimes infected from carcasses, especially sheep heads.
It is not usually transmitted from human to human, although this has been rarely reported.
What are the clinical features of orf?
Orf lesions are generally solitary or few in number. They occur most commonly on the fingers, hands or forearms but can appear on the face.
After an incubation period of 5–6 days, a small, firm, red or reddish-blue lump enlarges to form a flat-topped, blood-tinged pustule or blister. The fully developed lesion is usually 2–3 cm in diameter but may be as large as 5 cm. Characteristically, although there appears to be pus under the white skin, incising this will reveal firm, red tissue underneath. The orf lesion is sometimes irritable during the early stages and is often tender.
Red streaks up the lymph channels (lymphangitis) with enlargement of the lymph glands on the inner side of the elbow and/or under the arm (lymphadenopathy) are not uncommon. There may be a mild fever.
What are the complications of orf?
Secondary bacterial infection can occur.
Patients who are immune deficient or immune suppressed may develop larger or unusual orf lesions. Rarely widespread small blisters may occur, suggesting blood stream spread of the orf virus, but resolve after a few weeks.
Erythema multiforme, a secondary rash to the presence of the orf virus, may develop 10–14 days after the onset of orf. It results in targetoid macules, plaques and blisters on the hands and feet, face, arms and legs. Less distinctive red rashes, 'toxic erythemas' also occur, and rarely the blistering disorder, pemphigoid.
Erythema multiforme associated with orf
Orf and EM Orf and EM
How is orf diagnosed?
Orf is generally diagnosed clinically, in a person that has been handling sheep or goats.
The infection can be confirmed on a viral swab, skin biopsy or vesicular fluid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). It can also be identified by electron microscopy.
A similar condition, caused by a related virus, occurs in dairy farmers and is called milkers' nodule.
Treatment of orf in humans
Secondary bacterial infection should be treated with antibiotics.
Sheep and goat farmers should be aware of the possibility of orf and wear non-porous rubber gloves when handling the animals, particularly lambs and kids. Wash hands thoroughly or use an antiseptic gel to reduce the chance of infection.
Although people can develop multiple orf infections, some immunity to the virus is acquired after the first infection, so that it is less severe on subsequent occasions.
The disease can be minimised in sheep and goats by lower stocking rates and outdoor lambing. Vaccination of the herd using a live virus is recommended if there is a significant outbreak of orf. The vaccine causes a mild orf scab to develop at the vaccination site and should not be used in healthy herds where there is no history of orf. Vaccinated animals should be kept separate from unvaccinated animals until the scab has healed. Sheds should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.
Farmyard pox – pathology
Orf — Medscape Reference
Orf virus in sheep — Farm Health Online.com
Orf virus (sore mouth infection) — Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Osler Nodes And Janeway Lesions]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/osler-nodes-and-janeway-lesions]
Osler nodes, Janeway lesions (bacterial endocarditis)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions — extra information
63757006, 414550002, 73774007
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions
Author: Dr Todd Gunson, Dermatology Registrar, Greenlane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, 2006.
Introduction - Osler nodes and Janeway lesions
Introduction - bacterial endocarditis
Naming of Osler nodes
What are Osler nodes and Janeway lesions?
Osler nodes and Janeway lesions are two rare but well-known skin manifestations of bacterial endocarditis. They have also rarely been described in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), gonococcaemia (gonorrhoea), haemolytic anaemia and typhoid fever. They are important as they may help in the earlier diagnosis of a serious medical disorder.
What is bacterial endocarditis?
Bacterial endocarditis is an infection of the lining of the heart caused by various bacteria. It most often affects the heart valves. The bacteria gain access to the heart via the bloodstream; an infection elsewhere in the body may or may not be apparent. While some bacteria can cause infection in normal heart valves, bacterial endocarditis more commonly affects patients with abnormal valves as a result of previous rheumatic fever, valve surgery/replacement, or congenital abnormalities.
The responsible bacteria include various species of staphylococcus, streptococcus, pseudomonas, bartonella and several other organisms.
Bacterial endocarditis is often divided into ‘acute’ and ‘subacute’ varieties depending on the speed that it progresses. The symptoms may include fever, lethargy, shortness of breath, chest pain or palpitations. These symptoms require prompt assessment and investigation by a physician.
Splinter haemorrhage in the proximal nail plate is also a sign of bacterial endocarditis.
Osler nodes are red-purple, slightly raised, tender lumps, often with a pale centre. Pain often precedes the development of the visible lesion by up to 24 hours. They are typically found on the fingers and/or toes. They can occur at any time during the course of endocarditis (usually subacute) and last from hours to several days.
Osler node on ring finger as well as more subtle nodes seen on the little and middle finger Osler nodes on index finger. Note also the tiny splinter haemorrhages on fingernail also seen in end
How did Osler nodes get their name?
The lesions were first described by French Physicians as ‘Nodosites Cutanees Ephemeres’ meaning ‘Cutaneous nodules of short duration’ and by Dr Mullen of Hamilton. Parkes Weber later suggested that they are known as Osler nodes in recognition of the fact that Sir William Osler (1849-1919) had "first called attention to their full diagnostic importance". His first description of these lesions was in 1893. Sir William Osler, a Canadian-born Physician, wrote 1344 publications on a wide range of medical topics.
What is the cause of Osler nodes?
The underlying cause of the nodes has been debated since Osler first proposed micro-embolisation as a cause (this is the scattering of tiny particles around the bloodstream). Early reports favoured an allergic or immunological cause, but more recent reports have isolated bacteria from within the nodules.
A skin biopsy (histology) may reveal a neutrophilic vasculitis (inflammation of blood vessels) affecting the glomus apparatus of the ends of the fingers, or microabscess formation without evidence of vasculitis. It has been postulated that early biopsies show bacteria within the microabscesses and as time progresses, the nodes become sterile and hypersensitivity vasculitis or small vessel vasculitis develops, mediated by the immune system.
What tests should be done?
A careful search for endocarditis is made. This includes multiple blood cultures, other blood tests, urine tests, ECG, chest X-ray, and an echocardiogram (heart ultrasound scan). The diagnosis may be elusive.
A skin biopsy may be helpful to confirm the diagnosis of the Osler nodes.
What is the treatment of Osler nodes?
Treatment of Osler nodes is aimed at the bacterial endocarditis and involves intravenous antibiotics and sometimes valve surgery.
The skin lesions tend to heal spontaneously without scarring.
In contrast to Osler nodes, Janeway lesions are non-tender, often haemorrhagic (bleeding into the skin), and occur mostly on the palms and soles on the thenar and hypothenar eminences (at the base of the thumb and little finger respectively). They tend to last days to weeks before healing totally. Janeway lesions are more commonly seen in acute endocarditis, when bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus may be cultured from them. The histology is usually consistent with septic micro-embolism (i.e. bacteria may be found within the blood vessels).
Alpert JS, et al. Pathogenesis of Osler nodes. Annals of Internal Medicine 1976;85471–3. PubMed
Botella R, et al. Janeway lesions differential diagnosis with Osler nodes. Int J Derm 1993;32(9)673–4. PubMed
Cardullo AC, et al. Janeway lesions and Osler nodes a review of histopathologic findings. J Am Acad Derm 1990;22:1088–90. PubMed
Freedberg IM, et al. Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in general medicine. 6th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2003.
Bacterial infections
Heberden and Bouchard nodes
Infective Endocarditis – Medscape Reference
Heart conditions – endocarditis Better Health Channel, Victorian Government (Australia)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Otitis Externa]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/otitis-externa]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Otitis externa — extra information
H60, B37.84, H60.90, H60.50, H60.60, H60.539, B44.8, H92.0, H92.1, H62.43, B36.9, H62.40, B96.5
EG4Z, AA3Z, 1F20.10, 1F23.16, AA0Y, AA10, EG40.0, EK02.10, AA11, AA13, AB70.2, AB70.0, AA02
3135009, 86981007, 16681000, 53316003, 30250000, 53295002, 405821001, 280221000009107, 95812002, 232243009, 232231008, 232233006, 419957005, 302905001, 16001004, 65668001, 232230009
Last Reviewed: February, 2024
Author: Dr Ha Eun Grace Kim, Advanced Trainee in General Medicine, North Shore Hospital, New Zealand (2024)Previous contributors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer (2005)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
What is otitis externa?
Otitis externa, also called external otitis or ‘swimmer’s ear’, is a common inflammatory condition of the external auditory canal (the ear canal). It is characterised by redness, swelling, scaling, and thickening of the ear canal skin lining; and varying degrees of discomfort, itch, ear discharge, and hearing loss.
A weepy otitis externa An eczematous otitis externa An eczematous otitis externa - the patient had also extensive scalp seborrhoeic dermatitis An otitis externa due to allergy to an aural medicament
Who gets otitis externa?
It is estimated that 10% of people will develop otitis externa in their lifetime.
Otitis externa can occur in all age groups but peaks in children aged 5–9 years old. There is no gender predominance.
Incidence is highest during the summer months. This is thought to be related to increased water exposure such as recreational water activities; and warm, humid environments. Swimming is a key risk factor.
Other risk factors include:
Immunodeficiency eg, diabetes
Underlying skin conditions such as eczema or psoriasis
Having narrow ear canals.
What causes otitis externa?
Causes can be divided into infectious or non-infectious. Bacterial infections are the most common cause of otitis externa. Primary skin conditions are often precipitants of infectious otitis externa, but they can also be the sole cause of otitis externa.
Infectious otitis externa
The external auditory canal has normal bacterial flora but usually remains free from infection due to protective mechanisms such as intact skin, hair follicles, and cerumen (ear wax). The breakdown of these protective barriers leads to damage to the epithelial lining of the ear canal, and changes to its pH and the quality and amount of cerumen. This in turn leads to bacterial overgrowth.
Common causes that encourage bacterial overgrowth in the external ear include:
Increased water exposure from swimming, perspiration, and high humidity
Trauma to the ear canal eg, from scratching or insertion of foreign objects such as cotton buds.
Non-infectious dermatological causes
Otitis externa caused by other dermatological conditions is often referred to as ‘eczematous otitis externa’. Potential non-infectious causes include:
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Prior radiation treatment
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Due to disruption of the skin barrier, often these conditions can become complicated by superimposed infection.
What are the clinical features of otitis externa?
The most common symptoms of otitis externa are otalgia (ear pain or discomfort) and otorrhoea (discharge from the ear canal). The severity of symptoms can range from mild to severe.
Mild symptoms include pruritus and aural fullness (a feeling of fullness in the ear).
Severe symptoms include intense pain, lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes), and fevers.
Swelling within the ear canal can also cause variable hearing loss.
The clinical features of otitis externa may vary according to the cause:
Significant swelling of the ear canal is common.
Discomfort is often severe enough to require oral analgesics.
Lymphadenopathy around the base of the ear and fever may be present.
Discharge is usually scant white mucus, but occasionally thick in acute infection.
Bloody discharge and granulation tissue may be present in chronic infection.
Often there are no symptoms apart from a discharge; typically a fluffy white to off-white discharge, but may be black, grey, bluish-green, or yellow.
If symptoms are present, pruritus and aural fullness is most common. Pruritus may be quite intense, resulting in scratching and further irritation.
Tinnitus (ringing in the ears).
Usually intensely itchy.
Typically part of a more generalised skin involvement, including the external ears, face, and neck.
The skin may become red, thickened, crusty, and hyperpigmented from scratching.
Commonly associated with scalp involvement but rarely facial involvement.
Raised, red lesions with thick silvery-white adherent scale.
Red, swollen, itchy and exuding lesions.
The external auditory canal may react to allergens that do not cause a reaction elsewhere.
May affect the outer ear and lobe and extend onto the upper neck.
Lesions are usually patches of thickened, hardened skin.
May affect the outer ear and lobe.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Erythema of the skin may not be apparent in skin of colour. Inflammation in darker skin types may instead appear violaceous or darker than the surrounding skin.
What are the complications of otitis externa?
Periauricular cellulitis
Malignant otitis externa, also called necrotising otitis externa — an extension of the infection to the deep soft tissue and/or bone that can lead to osteomyelitis and cranial nerve palsies
Chronic otitis externa with potential canal stenosis and hearing loss
Negative psychosocial impact from symptoms and disruption to activities of daily life
How is otitis externa diagnosed?
The diagnosis of otitis externa is based on history and physical examination.
Gram staining and culture of the discharge should be considered in those with severe, recurrent, or chronic otitis externa; or in those who are immunocompromised.
What is the differential diagnosis for otitis externa?
Other conditions that could present with similar clinical features of otitis externa include:
Cerumen (earwax) obstruction
Chronic suppurative otitis media
Relapsing perichondritis
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, also known as herpes zoster oticus
Carcinoma of the ear canal
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
What is the treatment for otitis externa?
Clean debris and wax from the ear canal (aural toilet).
Manage pain with simple analgesia such as paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Abstain from water sports for at least 7–10 days.
Avoid hearing aids or other hearing devices until pain and discharge have resolved.
Considerations when deciding on specific treatment include a suspected infectious cause, the severity of the otitis externa, any immunodeficiency, and an intact or non-intact tympanic membrane.
Common topical treatments include:
Acetic acid 2% solution — inexpensive and effective against most infections but can be irritating to the inflamed canal
Polymyxin B drops — avoids potential neomycin sensitisation but is ineffective against Staphylococcus and other gram-positive organisms
Fluoroquinolone drops such as ciprofloxacin — effective without causing irritation or sensitisation, no risk of ototoxicity, but is expensive and overuse may cause antibiotic resistance in an important class of antibiotics
Antifungal drops — eg, nystatin, clotrimazole.
Topical drops that have a combination of antibiotics and steroids may help to reduce inflammation and resolve symptoms more quickly. Drops are usually administered 3–4 times a day for 5–7 days but depend on the product used and clinical presentation. More severe infections may require 10–14 days of treatment.
Topical aminoglycosides, acetic acid solutions, and polymyxins are contraindicated in those with a non-intact tympanic membrane, due to reports of ototoxicity.
In those with marked swelling of the ear canal, an ear wick moistened with antibiotic drops may be placed in the ear canal to help reduce swelling and improve the delivery of ear drops.
Oral antimicrobials are generally not indicated unless there is evidence of extension of the infection beyond the ear canal, immunocompromise, or suspected malignant otitis externa.
Other measures may include:
Optimising management of any primary or systemic skin conditions, which may include emollients and topical steroids
How do you prevent otitis externa?
Avoid poking and scratching the skin of the ear canal.
Avoid inserting foreign objects such as cotton buds or towels into the ear canal.
Wear a tight-fitting swimming cap or ear plugs to prevent water from entering the ear canal during water sports.
Dry the ears after swimming or showering.
Hearing aids should be removed each night and cleaned regularly.
Acidifying drops may be used to help dry the ear and prevent skin breakdown.
What is the outcome for otitis externa?
Those with an acute episode of infectious otitis externa treated with antibiotic/steroid ear drops tend to notice resolution in symptoms within 7–10 days. While further episodes may occur, recurrence risk is not known.
Chronic infection, usually associated with an underlying skin condition, can lead to other complications including (rarely) conductive hearing loss.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Estimated burden of acute otitis externa — United States, 2003–2007. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (MMWR). 2011;60(19):605–609. Available here
Clark WB, Brook I, Bianki D, Thompson DH. Microbiology of otitis externa. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1997;116(1):23–5. doi: 10.1016/S0194-59989770346-2. Journal
Hajioff D, MacKeith S. Otitis externa. BMJ Clin Evid. 2015 Jun;2015:0510. Article
Kaushik V, Malik T, Saeed SR. Interventions for acute otitis externa. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(1):CD004740. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004740.pub2. Journal
Osguthorpe JD, Nielsen DR. Otitis externa: Review and clinical update. Am Fam Physician. 2006 Nov;74(9):1510–6. Journal
Rosenfeld R, Schwartz S, Cannon C, et al. Clinical practice guideline: acute otitis externa executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 Feb;150(2):161–8. doi: 10.1177/0194599813517659. Journal
Rosenfeld R, Singer M, Wasserman JM, Stinnett SS. Systematic review of topical antimicrobial therapy for acute otitis externa. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006 Apr; 134(4 Suppl):S24–48. doi: 10.1016/j.otohns.2006.02.013. Journal
Bacterial skin infections
Pseudomonas skin infections
Fungal skin infections
Topical antifungal medications
Otitis externa — BMJ Best Practice
Swimmer’s Ear (Otitis Externa) — Kids Health
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Paronychia]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/paronychia]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Paronychia — extra information
Whitlow, Perionychia
B37.2, L03.0, L03.1, B00.89
EE12.0, 1F23.13, EE13.2, 1F00.0Y
71906005, 200744008, 187017007, 247517004, 402930002, 773296007
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, August 2017.
Paronychia is inflammation of the skin around a finger or toenail. It can be acute (< 6 weeks) or chronic (persisting > 6 weeks).
Paronychia is also called whitlow. It may be associated with felon.
Who gets paronychia?
Acute paronychia can affect anyone. However, it is more likely to follow a break in the skin, especially between the proximal nail fold/cuticle and the nail plate. For example:
If the nail is bitten (onychophagia) or the nail-fold is habitually picked (eg, habit-tic nail deformity)
In infants that suck their fingers or thumbs
Following manicuring
Ingrown toenails (onychocryptosis)
On the application of sculptured or artificial fingernails
Treatment with oral retinoid that dries the skin (acitretin, isotretinoin)
Other drugs, including epidermal growth factor receptor and BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib)
Chronic paronychia mainly occurs in people with hand dermatitis, or who have constantly cold and wet hands, such as:
People with poor circulation
Acute and chronic skin infections tend to be more frequent and aggressive in patients with diabetes or chronic debility, or that are immune suppressed by drugs or disease.
What causes paronychia?
Acute paronychia is usually due to bacterial infection with Staphylococcus aureus (which may be multiresistant), Streptococcus pyogenes, Pseudomonas, or other bacterial pathogens. It can also be due to the cold sore virus, Herpes simplex (herpetic whitlow), and the yeast, Candida albicans.
What are the clinical features of paronychia?
Acute paronychia develops rapidly over a few hours, and usually affects a single nail fold. Symptoms are pain, redness and swelling.
If herpes simplex is the cause (herpetic whitlow), multiple tender vesicles may be observed. Sometimes yellow pus appears under the cuticle and can evolve to abscess. The nail plate may lift up (onycholysis). Acute paronychia due to S. pyogenes may be accompanied by fever, lymphangitis and tender lymphadenopathy.
Acute candida more commonly infects the proximal nail fold.
Paronychia and ingrown toenail in an athlete Acute staphylococcal paronychia Acute herpetic paronychia
Chronic paronychia is a gradual process. It may start in one nail fold, particularly the proximal nail fold, but often spreads laterally and to several other fingers. Each affected nail fold is swollen and lifted off the nail plate. This allows the entry of organisms and irritants. The affected skin may be red and tender from time to time, and sometimes a little pus (white, yellow or green) can be expressed from under the cuticle.
The nail plate thickens and is distorted, often with transverse ridges.
Nailfold swelling Nail dystrophy Eczema
What are the complications of paronychia?
Acute paronychia can spread to cause a serious hand infection (cellulitis) and may involve underlying tendons (infectious tendonitis).
The main complication of chronic paronychia is nail dystrophy. It is often associated with distorted, ridged nail plates. They may become yellow or green/black and brittle. After recovery, it takes up to a year for the nails to grow back to normal.
How is paronychia diagnosed?
Paronychia is a clinical diagnosis, often supported by laboratory evidence of infection.
Gram stain microscopy may reveal bacteria
Potassium hydroxide microscopy may reveal fungi
Nail clippings for culture (mycology).
What is the treatment for paronychia?
Soak affected digit in warm water, several times daily.
Topical antiseptic may be prescribed for a localised, minor infection.
Oral antibiotics may be necessary for severe or prolonged bacterial infection; often a tetracycline, such as doxycycline, is prescribed.
Consider early treatment with aciclovir in case of severe herpes simplex infection (herpetic whitlow).
Surgical incision and drainage may be required for abscess followed by irrigation and packing with gauze.
Rarely, the nail must be removed to allow pus to drain.
Attend to predisposing factors.
Keep the hands dry and warm.
Avoid wet work, or use totally waterproof gloves that are lined with cotton.
Keep fingernails scrupulously clean.
Wash after dirty work with soap and water, rinse off and dry carefully.
Apply emollient hand cream frequently – dimethicone barrier creams may help.
Treatment should focus on dermatitis and any microbes grown on culture [1].
Topical corticosteroid ointment is applied for 2–4 weeks and repeated for flares.
Tacrolimus ointment is an alternative when dermatitis is not responding to routine management [2].
Antiseptics or antifungal lotions or solutions may be applied for several months.
Oral antifungal agent (itraconazole or fluconazole), if C. albicans is confirmed.
Patients with diabetes and vascular disease with toenail paronychia infections should be examined for signs of cellulitis.
Surgical excision of the proximal nail fold may be necessary.
Eponychial marsupialisation involves surgical removal of a narrow strip of skin next to the nail, to reduce the risk of infection [3].
Swiss roll technique has the advantage of retaining the nail plate and quicker recovery [4].
What is the outlook for paronychia?
Acute paronychia usually clears completely in a few days, and rarely recurs in healthy individuals.
Chronic paronychia may persist for months or longer and can recur in predisposed individuals.
Bednar MS, Lane LB. Eponychial marsupialization and nail removal for surgical treatment of chronic paronychia. J Hand Surg Am 1991;16:314–17. PubMed Central.
Pabari A, Iyer S, Khoo CT. Swiss roll technique for treatment of paronychia. Tech Hand Surg 2011;15:75–7. PubMed.
Relhan V, Goel K, Bansal S, Garg VK. Management of chronic paronychia. Indian J Dermatol. 2014;59(1):15–20. doi:10.4103/0019-5154.123482 Journal
Rigopoulos D, Gregoriou S, Belyayeva E, Larios G, Kontochristopoulos G, Katsambas A. Efficacy and safety of tacrolimus ointment 0.1% vs. betamethasone 17-valerate 0.1% in the treatment of chronic paronychia: an unblinded randomized study. Br J Dermatol. 2009;160:858–60. PubMed
Rigopoulos D, Larios G, Gregoriou S, Alevizos A. Acute and chronic paronychia. Am Fam Physician. 2008;77(3):339–46. Journal
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Paronychia — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Patch Tests]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/patch-tests]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Patch tests — extra information
Reactions, Diagnosis and testing
41778007, 411127004, 252525002
Diagnosis and testing
Author: Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, East Lancashire NHS Trust, UK. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. Updated December 2021
What are patch tests?
Patch test series before application of patch test Patch test strips in place after application Patch test removal at 48 hrs with positive reaction to a rubber accelerator
Patch tests are not the same as skin prick tests, which are used to diagnose hay fever allergy.
How is patch testing performed?
A series of allergens are applied, usually to the back, on special tapes fitted with small aluminium discs (Finn chambers) that hold the individual allergens (between 10 and 12). Anywhere between 30 and over a hundred allergens can be applied at a time. Ideally the patch tests are applied when the dermatitis is inactive, but if the back skin is inflamed, the arms or abdominal skin can be used for application. After carefully marking the position of the patch test panels, they are removed at 48 hours, and the skin inspected 48 hours after that.
During patch testing, it is best to:
Be taking less than 10 mg of oral prednisolone a day
Not be on an immunosuppressive agent that will reduce the reaction
Avoid potent topical steroids to the application site for three days before patch testing is commenced
Avoid bathing or showering the test area which will wash off the panels or the identification marking
Avoid excessive exercise that may dislodge the allergen tapes.
Antihistamines can be taken as normal as they do not interfere with the type IV hypersensitivity reaction.
How are the allergens selected?
Additional series of allergens may be applied, according to:
Occupation eg, hairdressers, bakers, dentists
Site of dermatitis eg, facial, lower leg, vulval, perianal, feet
Suspected allergen exposure eg, acrylates, epoxy resins, plastics and glues textile dyes and resins, medicaments, topical steroids
Patients own products eg, cosmetics, moisturisers, nail varnish, topical medicaments, gloves; these may need to be diluted to the correct patch testing strength.
At a pre-patch test consultation, the series of allergens required are selected. This is important so that potential allergens are not missed, and any product dilution arranged.
It is helpful to bring health and safety data sheets and product packaging (which may list individual allergen ingredients). If there is a suspicious product that may be the cause of dermatitis, it is important this is brought along to the doctors appointment. Patch testing may be required and its packaging will contain valuable details of its constituents.
How are patch tests interpreted?
Reactions are graded for each allergen on a spectrum as:
++ moderate reaction
+++ strong reaction.
Some allergens are coloured and will temporarily stain the skin (PPD is black, disperse blue is blue, textile resins are a variety of colours. The colour can be removed with an alcohol swab and these are not to be confused with true positive reactions.
+ patch test reaction  Patch test ++ reaction to neomycin +++ reaction to compositae mix
Irritant reactions can occur in those with atopic eczema, particularly to metals (nickel, chromate and cobalt), perfumes and some rubber accelerators, and are not relevant.
Negative results may mean that the dermatitis is endogenous or irritant in cause, or perhaps the allergen may have been missed (not considered or tested for, or may even be a novel allergen).
Positive reactions are, if possible, then interpreted as being of:
Current relevance — the reaction can explain dermatitis that is currently being investigated
Past relevance — the history reveals a past allergic dermatitis but does not explain the current episode
Future relevance — the allergen is likely to be encountered in the future
Uncertain relevance — this may change when the patient finds the identified allergen after scrutinising their personal care or occupational products
Potential cross reaction — eg, positive reaction to the hair dye allergen PPD may result in some people reacting to parabens (in cosmetics and sunscreens) or textile dyes.
Detailed information sheets can be given for many of the allergens which will guide patients as to where they may find, and therefore avoid, the identified allergen. It is useful to make a note of identified allergens for checking products when shopping. Most countries mandate that allergen constituents appear within or on the packaging or several types of product, particularly personal care items. The print can be very small, and cosmetic manufacturer’s websites usually list constituents, are up to date and easier to read.
Adverse reactions to patch tests
Positive reactions produce small itchy patches of eczema. At the end of the testing, this can be treated with a topical steroid.
Other adverse reactions include:
Severe local reactions with local blistering — most notorious with the hair dye allergen PPD; if this is suspected, an initial patch test with a low strength of PPD can be used
Post-inflammatory pigmentation
Flareup of the initial eczema at sites distant from the patch test reaction
Tape reactions — hypoallergenic tape is used but rarely people will react to this
An “angry back” reaction — if the dermatitis is very active at the time of patch testing, multiple positive patch tests may arise; these are difficult to interpret and re-patch testing is usually required when the eczema is more quiescent.
Black skin staining due to the hair dye allergen PPD "Angry back" – multiple positive reactions due to eczema being too active
Seine AJ, Baird EA, Chan L, et al. A baseline patch test series for New Zealand. Australas J Dermatol. 2021;62(4):489–95. doi:10.1111/ajd.13673. Journal
The baseline series of patch test allergens
AllergEAZE system of patch tests
Patch testing — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Periocular Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/periocular-dermatitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Periocular dermatitis
Periocular dermatitis — extra information
Periorbital dermatitis
Periocular dermatitis
Authors: Harini Rajgopal Bala, Research and Education Fellow; Jennifer Cahill, Dermatologist; Rosemary L Nixon, Dermatologist, Occupational Physician and Director; Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre (ODREC), Skin and Cancer Foundation Inc. Melbourne, Australia. November 2016.
What is periocular dermatitis?
Periocular dermatitis is a localised form of periorificial dermatitis. It is characterised by small red scaly papules and pustules located around the eye [1].
Periorificial dermatitis includes perioral dermatitis or periocular dermatitis alone, or in association.
Perioral dermatitis describes an eruption around the mouth and nose.
Periocular dermatitis is confined to the skin around the eyes [2].
Who gets periocular dermatitis?
Periocular dermatitis is not uncommon. It most often arises in women between the ages of 16 and 45 years [2,3].
It can also affect children [4].
It often occurs in people using topical corticosteroids.
What causes periocular dermatitis?
The cause of periocular dermatitis is not well understood. It is thought to be due to a combination of environmental and genetic factors [3].
Periocular dermatitis may be related to [3,5]:
An impaired skin barrier – there is an association between atopic dermatitis and periocular dermatitis
Disturbance of follicular microflora
Alteration of the pilosebaceous unit.
Triggers for periocular dermatitis
Topical corticosteroids, especially those of high potency or fluorinated
Inhaled and systemic corticosteroids
Dental preparations [3]
Fluoride-containing toothpaste
Amalgam dental fillings
Microorganisms [4,5]
Demodex folliculorum
Other triggers [4,5]
Hormonal supplements, including oral contraceptives
Environmental factors, such as ultraviolet light, heat, cold and wind
What are the clinical features of periocular dermatitis?
Clinical features of periocular dermatitis include:
Involvement of the areas surrounding the eye, including the upper and lower eyelids [1,3,5]
Small erythematous papules and, less commonly, papulopustules and/or papulovesicles
Pruritus [3] or a burning sensation [5]
Erythematous dry background skin [1,4].
Periocular dermatitis Periocular dermatitis Periocular dermatitis
How is periocular dermatitis diagnosed?
The clinical presentation of periocular dermatitis is usually typical, and thus it is generally diagnosed on clinical examination [4].
In the unlikely event that a skin biopsy is taken, the histology shows non-specific inflammation, with perifollicular or perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltration [3,4].
What is the treatment for periocular dermatitis?
Stop applying all skin creams to the area, including topical corticosteroids, moisturisers, sunscreen, and makeup [5].
If the patient is using topical corticosteroids, there is a risk of a severe flare after cessation. Consider tapering the topical corticosteroid by decreasing the potency or reducing the frequency of application [3,4].
Topical therapy may be effective for mild disease [3]. Options include [6]:
Oral therapies may be used alone or in addition to topical treatment for moderate and severe disease. Treatment may be required for up to 3 months.
Tetracycline antibiotics, such as doxycycline or minocycline, are the treatments of choice.
Macrolides, including erythromycin, are used in children aged under 11 years.
Isotretinoin is usually reserved for treatment-resistant periocular dermatitis.
What is the outcome for periocular dermatitis?
Periocular dermatitis usually resolves with appropriate management, although it may take some weeks or even months to clear up.
It can be prevented by avoiding applying potent topical corticosteroids and thick face creams around the eye.
Rapini RP, Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL. Dermatology. 2-volume set. St. Louis: Mosby, 2007: 87.
Feser A, Mahler V. Periorbital dermatitis: causes, differential diagnoses and therapy. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 2010; 8: 159–66. DOI: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07216.x. PubMed
Tempark T, Shwayder TA. Perioral dermatitis: a review of the condition with special attention to treatment options. Am J Clin Dermatol 2014; 15: 101–13. DOI: 10.1007/s40257-014-0067-7. PubMed
Lipozenčić J, Ljubojević Hadžavdić S. Perioral dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 2014; 32: 125–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2013.05.034. PubMed
Lee GL, Zirwas MJ. Granulomatous rosacea and periorificial dermatitis: controversies and review of management and treatment. Dermatol Clin 2015; 33: 447–55. DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2015.03.009. PubMed
Oakley A, Ngan V. Periorificial dermatitis. DermNet New Zealand. Updated January 2016. Available at: www.dermnetnz.org/topics/periorificial-dermatitis (accessed July 2016).
Periorificial dermatitis
Periocular dermatitis case 1
Acne, Rosacea, and Perioral Dermatitis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Periorificial Dermatitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/periorificial-dermatitis]
Periorificial dermatitis (Perioral Dermatitis): Authoritative guidance — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Periorificial dermatitis
Periorificial dermatitis — extra information
238751002, 403367007, 403655004
Periorificial dermatitis
Author(s): Dr Nayab Shah, Royal Perth Hospital, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2022
Differential diagnoses
What is periorificial dermatitis?
Periorificial dermatitis (POD) is a relatively common chronic inflammatory skin eruption. It preferentially targets cutaneous orifices as implied in its name ie, around the eyes, nostrils, mouth, and occasionally the genitals.
Periorificial dermatitis may be limited to a single orifice, where it is more appropriately termed:
Perioral dermatitis (classic site affected)
Periocular dermatitis
Perinasal dermatitis
Genital periorificial dermatitis (involving the labia majora, scrotum or anus).
Perioral erythematous papules sparing the immediate perivermillion skin in perioral dermatitis Perioral and nasolabial fold papules sparing the perivermillion skin in perioral dermatitis Perioral dermatitis Periocular dermatitis Perioral dermatitis
Who gets periorificial dermatitis?
Periorificial dermatitis is slightly more common in lighter-skinned females and usually affects young to middle-aged women (20–45 years). However, it is also seen in young children, often between 7 months to 13 years old.
The exact incidence and prevalence remain unknown.
What causes periorificial dermatitis?
The exact cause is not understood. A suggested mechanism proposes epidermal dysfunction as the primary disturbance, resulting in:
Increased penetration of exogenous agents through the stratum corneum, triggering an irritation reaction
Enhancing trans-epidermal water loss resulting in tightness and dryness, causing patients to increase use of topical products, leading to further irritation.
Risk factors associated with POD
Steroid use via all routes (topical, inhaled, nasal insufflation) is the most common association. Application may be accidental (eg, nasal sprays) or intentional.
Epidermal barrier dysfunction secondary to:
Nutritional deficiencies eg, zinc deficiency
Occlusive emollient use leading to overhydration eg, paraffin or petroleum-based emollients
Sunscreen use, particularly physical sunscreens in children.
Allergens/irritants eg, toothpaste and dental fillings.
Infective organisms such as Demodex spp., Candida albicans, and fusiform bacteria have been cultured from lesions, however, their significance remains unclear.
Hormonal changes caused by oral contraceptive use, pregnancy, and premenstrual flares have been observed.
Atopic predisposition.
Physical factors including UV light, heat, and wind seem to worsen periorificial dermatitis.
What are the clinical features of periorificial dermatitis?
Cutaneous features of periorificial dermatitis include:
An acneiform eruption
Clusters of skin-coloured to red papules, vesicles, and pustules
Usually less than 2mm each; may coalesce into larger lesions
Erythematous base with a sharp border
Surrounding skin is often dry
Scaly and flaky skin surface
Burning sensation or skin tightness
Pain is rare, although skin sensitivity is common and patients are otherwise systemically well.
Topical steroids can obscure the primary rash and may also result in steroid-induced cutaneous side effects.
Perioral dermatitis due to the use of a steroid nebuliser mask Papules and pustules (an unusual feature) in perioral dermatitis Florid perioral dermatitis due to potent topical steroid use
Lupoid perioral dermatitis
This is a severe subtype of POD. Eruptions are denser and larger with red-brown papules. The affected skin shows lupoid infiltrates, with a characteristic apple-jelly colour on diascopy. This subtype can result in permanent scarring.
Childhood granulomatous perioral dermatitis (CGPD)
CGPD is a rare variant often seen in children with dark-coloured skin. It was previously termed FACE (Facial Afro-Caribbean Childhood Eruption). However, it has since been renamed as it has been observed in children with light-colour skin and those not of Afro-Caribbean heritage.
Patients present with skin-coloured, red or yellow-brown monomorphic, dome-shaped papules. There is typically a lack of pustules and vesicles in CGPD, and erythema and scaling are less prominent than in classic POD. Additionally, the histological features between CGPD and POD are different.
Extra-orificial skin can also be affected with an eruption on the neck, chest, and extremities, in addition to conjunctivitis and blepharitis.
What are the complications of periorificial dermatitis?
Granulomatous periorificial dermatitis — a variant of periorificial dermatitis that presents with persistent yellowish papules.
Occurs mainly in young children and nearly always follows the use of a corticosteroid.
Granulomatous perifollicular infiltrate on histopathology.
Steroid rosacea presents with steroid-induced, large facial papules, papulopustules, and telangiectasia on the mid-face, including forehead and cheeks.
Rebound flare of severe periorificial dermatitis may occur after abrupt cessation of potent topical steroid to facial skin.
Psychological distress.
How is periorificial dermatitis diagnosed?
POD is a clinical diagnosis. Other investigations that may be used are:
Swabs and skin scrapings for culture and potassium hydroxide (KOH) testing to exclude bacterial and fungal infections.
Skin biopsy where there is diagnostic uncertainty and may reveal:
Perivascular and perifollicular inflammation with oedema and lymphocytic infiltrates
Epidermal spongiosis
CGPD characteristically shows perifollicular and upper dermal tissue containing noncaseating granulomas surrounded by lymphocytes and often giant cells. Again, epidermal spongiosis may be present.
What is the differential diagnosis for periorificial dermatitis?
Differential diagnosis depends on the site(s) involved.
Rosacea — patients are often older, distribution is different, and rosacea-associated complications such as rhinophyma are absent
Acne — comedones, nodules, and cysts present which are not typical of POD
Seborrheic dermatitis — different distribution including involvement of frontal hairline, scalp, and presternally.
Lip licker's dermatitis
Granulomatous rosacea
Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.
What is the treatment for periorificial dermatitis?
Periorificial dermatitis is a benign self-limiting condition with no systemic consequences. However, it may be cosmetically unacceptable to the patient, resulting in significant disease burden and psychological distress. Periorificial dermatitis usually responds well to treatments.
The POD Severity Index (PODSI) has been used in literature to help quantify disease severity and response to treatment.
Stop all facial cosmetics and topical products, including sunscreens and emollients
Preferably wash the face with warm water alone until the rash clears, then consider a non-soap cleanser
A bland emollient without preservatives/additives can be used for skin dryness. Avoid occlusive creams and ointments as they can worsen POD.
A gel or liquid sunscreen can be used
Discontinue all topical corticosteroids
Slowly wean steroids over weeks, switching to a lower potency steroid before cessation and substituting with topical pimecrolimus
Tacrolimus is an alternative but has less evidence
A flare may occur on discontinuation — steroids should not be restarted.
Medically necessary nasal, inhaled, and oral steroids should be continued but will increase recovery time. Rinsing the face and mouth after using nasal or inhaled agents may help.
Topical and/or systemic treatments are available; duration is usually 4–8 weeks but may require an extension. Recurrence can occur if treatment is too short.
Metronidazole 0.75–1%
Pimecrolimus 1% twice daily for up to 4 weeks
Topical treatments are often not tolerated due to associated facial sensitivity; if they are, they may be rotated every 6–8 weeks if the patient fails to respond.
Other topical therapies have limited evidence supporting efficacy and safety. These include:
Sulfacetamide/sulfur
Photodynamic therapy.
Tetracycline — recommended first-line, and the response is usually quick
Erythromycin — first-line for pregnant women and children under 8 years
Azithromycin is an alternative.
Cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride — limited evidence for efficacy and safety.
What is the outcome for periorificial dermatitis?
With treatment, most patients recover well. If POD recurs when antibiotics are discontinued, or in the future, the same treatment can be used again.
Gray NA, Tod B, Rohwer A, Fincham L, Visser WI, McCaul M. Pharmacological interventions for periorificial (perioral) dermatitis in children and adults: a systematic review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022;36(3):380–90. doi: 10.1111/jdv.17817. PubMed
Kim Yoon Jee, Jung Woong Shin, Jong Suk Lee, Young-Lip Park, Kyu Uang Whang and Sung Yul Lee. “C.” Annals of Dermatology 23 (2011): 386–8. PubMed Central
Lipozenčić J, Hadžavdić, S.L. Perioral dermatitis. Clin Dermatol. 2014 Jan-Feb;32(1):125–30. doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2013.05.034. Journal
Searle T, Ali FR, Al-Niaimi F. Perioral dermatitis: Diagnosis, proposed etiologies, and management. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021 Dec;20(12):3839–48. doi: 10.1111/jocd.14060. Journal
Periorificial dermatitis in children
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Acne, Rosacea, and Perioral Dermatitis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Perioral dermatitis — American Academy of Dermatology Association (patient information)
Paediatric Perioral Dermatitis Patient Information — Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pitted Keratolysis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pitted-keratolysis]
Pitted Keratolysis: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pitted keratolysis — extra information
Keratosis plantaris sulcatum, Keratolysis plantare sulcatum
Author(s): Cindy Lam, University of Adelaide, South Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. July 2022.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is pitted keratolysis?
Pitted keratolysis, also known as keratolysis plantare sulcatum or ringed keratolysis, is a superficial bacterial skin infection characterised by crater-like pits and malodour. It typically affects pressure-bearing areas on the soles of the feet, although the palms are rarely affected.
This condition is very treatable with a good prognosis.
Pits and maceration in pitted keratolysis on the heel (PK-patient1)Interdigital and toe pitted keratolysis Close up of plantar pits in pitted keratolysis White macerated and pitting plantar skin in pitted keratolysis Heel maceration and pits in pitted keratolysis
Who gets pitted keratolysis?
Pitted keratolysis is more commonly seen in men compared to women and can affect all age groups.
Occupations at risk include:
Sailors and fishermen
Occupations where feet are constantly wet (paddy field workers, boatmen).
Factors that increase the risk of developing pitted keratolysis include:
Hyperhidrosis — excessive sweating of the hands and feet
Keratoderma — thickened skin of palms and soles
Prolonged use of occlusive footwear (vinyl footwear, rubber boots)
What causes pitted keratolysis?
Pitted keratolysis is caused by a range of bacterial species. The most common are Corynebacteria, Dermatophilus congolensis, Kytococcus sedentarius, Actinomyces, or Streptomyces.
Bacteria thrive under moist and warm conditions. They proliferate and produce protease enzymes that cause destruction of the stratum corneum to create pits/craters. The odour is associated with the sulfur compounds (thiols, sulphides, and thioesters) which are produced by the bacteria.
What are the clinical features of pitted keratolysis?
The infection often occurs bilaterally on pressure-bearing areas, most commonly the ball of the foot and heel. Involvement of the palms have been reported in certain professions such as rice paddy farmers.
It is often asymptomatic, however, when symptomatic there may be associated pruritus and pain on walking.
Characteristic features include:
Pits on the stratum corneum (1–3mm); these may form confluences, irregular erosions, or sulci
Some pits may have a brown appearance (giving the appearance of dirty feet)
The appearance of the pits are often amplified when feet are wet.
Associated features:
Slimy texture of the skin
Variants of pitted keratolysis (less common):
Painful plaque-like variant: tender erythematous to violaceous papules
Large crateriform depressions
Corynebacterial triad: pitted keratolysis, erythrasma, and trichomycosis axillaris.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Pitted keratolysis has been seen in patients of all skin types. They all present similarly and can present in a range of sizes and colours.
What are the complications of pitted keratolysis?
Psychosocial impact due to foot odour
Limitation of function due to symptomatic pitted keratolysis
No mortality is associated with pitted keratolysis.
How is pitted keratolysis diagnosed?
Diagnosis is often clinical given its distinctive appearance and malodour. Consider examination of intertriginous areas (axilla and groin) for co-existing corynebacterial infections, such as erythrasma and trichomycosis axillaris.
Other investigations that can be considered:
Wood lamp examination which shows coral red fluorescence (erythrasma)
Skin scrapings may be taken to exclude a fungal infection
Skin biopsy if there is diagnostic uncertainty, with histopathology revealing:
Pits or erosions limited to stratum corneum
Microorganisms with coccoid or filamentous forms may be detected on stain
Culture rarely indicated but may identify the causative organism.
What is the differential diagnosis for pitted keratolysis?
Basal cell nevus syndrome
Focal acral hyperkeratosis
Keratolysis exfoliativa
What is the treatment for pitted keratolysis?
Pitted keratolysis can be treated successfully with adequate foot hygiene, topical antibiotics, and antiseptics.
Ensure adequate foot hygiene:
Avoid prolonged use of occlusive footwear
Wear properly fitted footwear to reduce foot friction
Wear absorbent cotton socks and ensure frequent changing of socks
Wash socks after wear at 60°C with soap and water to eliminate bacteria
Wash feet with soap or antiseptic cleanser twice a day
Apply antiperspirant to the feet regularly
Avoid sharing footwear with others.
Rotate dry insoles on a daily basis so feet are never standing on damp shoe inners
Manage underlying hyperhidrosis.
Commonly used options applied twice daily, usually for 2–4 weeks are:
Antimicrobial with keratolytic properties
Can be used alone or in combination with other topical antibiotics
Oral antibiotics (for refractory disease)
Clindamycin or erythromycin
Duration dependent on severity and response to treatment, at least 10 days recommended
Tetracyclines are an alternative
What is the outcome for pitted keratolysis?
Pitted keratolysis is treatable and has an excellent prognosis.
No treatment: may last for years with spontaneous remission or exacerbation.
With treatment: often resolves in 2–4 weeks.
de Almeida HL Jr, Siqueira RN, Meireles Rda S, Rampon G, de Castro LA, Silva RM. Pitted keratolysis. An Bras Dermatol. 2016;91(1):106–8. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164096. Journal
Kaptanoglu AF, Yuksel O, Ozyurt S. Plantar pitted keratolysis: a study from non-risk groups. Dermatol Reports. 2012;4(1):e4. Published 2012 Feb 7. doi:10.4081/dr.2012.e4. Journal
Ramsey ML. Pitted keratolysis: a common infection of active feet. Phys Sportsmed. 1996;24(10):51–6. doi:10.3810/psm.1996.10.1319. Journal
Shelley WB, Shelley ED. Coexistent erythrasma, trichomycosis axillaris, and pitted keratolysis: an overlooked corynebacterial triad?. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1982;7(6):752–7. doi:10.1016/s0190-9622(82)80158-8. Journal
Vlahovic TC, Dunn SP, Kemp K. The use of a clindamycin 1%-benzoyl peroxide 5% topical gel in the treatment of pitted keratolysis: a novel therapy. Adv Skin Wound Care. 2009;22(12):564–6. doi:10.1097/01.ASW.0000363468.18117.fe. Journal
Bacterial skin infections
Bacterial skin infections
Pitted keratolysis pathology
Trichomycosis axillaris
Pitted keratolysis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pityriasis Alba]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pityriasis-alba]
Pityriasis alba (dry white patches)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pityriasis alba — extra information
402296004, 402297008, 402298003
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated January 2016. Revised September 2020.
What is pityriasis alba?
Pityriasis alba is a low-grade type of eczema/dermatitis mainly seen in children.
The name describes its appearance: pityriasis refers to the characteristic fine scale, and alba to its pale colour (hypopigmentation).
Who gets pityriasis alba?
Pityriasis alba is common worldwide with a prevalence in children of around 5%.
Pityriasis alba mainly affects children and adolescents aged 3 to 16 years, but can occur in older and younger people.
It affects boys and girls equally.
The hypopigmentation of pityriasis alba is more prominent, and the condition perhaps more common, in dark skin compared to white skin.
What causes pityriasis alba?
The cause of pityriasis alba is unknown.
Pityriasis alba often coexists with dry skin and atopic dermatitis.
It often presents following sun exposure, perhaps because tanning of surrounding skin makes affected areas more prominent.
Ultraviolet radiation
Excessive or inadequate bathing
Low levels of serum copper and other trace elements
Malassezia yeasts (which produce a metabolite, pityriacitrin, that inhibits tyrosinase thus causing hypopigmentation).
What are the clinical features of pityriasis alba?
Classic pityriasis alba usually presents with 1 to 20 patches or thin plaques.
Most lesions occur on the face, especially on the cheeks and chin.
Patches may also appear on the neck, shoulders, and upper arms and are uncommon elsewhere.
Patch size varies from 0.5 to 5 cm in diameter.
Patches are round, oval or irregular in shape.
Pityriasis alba may have well-demarcated or, more usually, poorly defined edges.
Itch is minimal or absent.
Hypopigmentation is more noticeable in summer.
Dryness and scaling is more noticeable in winter when environmental humidity tends to be lower.
Typically, a patch of pityriasis alba evolves through several stages.
Slightly scaly pink patch or plaque with a just palpable papular surface.
Hypopigmented patch or plaque with fine surface scale.
Then post-inflammatory hypopigmented macule without scale.
Pityriasis alba on the cheeks Pityriasis alba on the cheeks Pityriasis alba Pityriasis alba
Dermoscopy of pityriasis alba
Poorly defined pale area
White structureless areas
Faint pigment network
Superficial white scale
How is pityriasis alba diagnosed?
Pityriasis alba is usually a clinical diagnosis but may be confused with several other disorders that cause hypopigmentation.
To exclude these, investigations may include:
Wood lamp examination: the hypopigmentation of pityriasis alba does not enhance, and there is no fluorescence
Scrapings for mycology: microscopy and fungal culture are negative in pityriasis alba
Skin biopsy: biopsy is rarely required, but may reveal mildly spongiotic dermatitis and reduction in melanin.
What is the treatment for pityriasis alba?
No treatment is necessary for asymptomatic pityriasis alba.
A moisturising cream may improve the dry appearance.
A mild topical steroid (0.5-1% hydrocortisone) may reduce redness and itch if present.
Calcineurin inhibitors (pimecrolimus cream and tacrolimus ointment) may be as effective as hydrocortisone and have been reported to speed recovery of skin colour.
How can pityriasis alba be prevented?
The development or prominence of pityriasis alba can be reduced with sunscreen use to minimise sun tanning.
What is the outlook for pityriasis alba?
Pityriasis alba clears after an average of one year, with a range of a few months up to two or three years. The colour gradually returns completely to normal.
Al-Refu K. Dermoscopy is a new diagnostic tool in diagnosis of common hypopigmented macular disease: A descriptive study. Dermatol Reports. 2018;11(1):7916. doi:10.4081/dr.2018.7916. PubMed
Miazek N, Michalek I, Pawlowska-Kisiel M, Olszewska M, Rudnicka L. Pityriasis alba--common disease, enigmatic entity: up-to-date review of the literature. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015;32(6):786–91. doi:10.1111/pde.12683. PubMed
Karanfilian KM, Behbahani S, Lambert MW, et al. The pathophysiology of pityriasis alba: time-dependent histologic changes. Clin Dermatol. 2020;38(3):354–6. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2019.07.002. PubMed
Jadotte YT, Janniger CK. Pityriasis alba revisited: perspectives on an enigmatic disorder of childhood. Cutis. 2011;87(2):66–72. PubMed
Khafagy GM, Nada HR, Rashid LA, El-Samanoudy SI, Abd El-Sattar EM. Role of trace elements in pityriasis alba. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2020;59:126422. doi:10.1016/j.jtemb.2019.126422. PubMed
Ingram JR. Eczematous disorders. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology [4 volumes], 9th edn, Wiley Blackwell, 2016:39.25–6.
Dermatitis online course for health professionals
Dermatologic Manifestations of Pityriasis Alba — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Pityriasis Alba — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Pityriasis alba — MedlinePlus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pityriasis Lichenoides]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pityriasis-lichenoides]
Pityriasis lichenoides (PLC, PLEVA): A Complete Overview - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pityriasis lichenoides
Pityriasis lichenoides — extra information
Chronic pityriasis lichenoides, Lichenoid eruptions, Mucha-Habermann disease
200983001, 86487001, 10057001, 402860008
Pityriasis lichenoides
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 1998. Updated: Dr Nisal Punchihewa, Junior Medical Officer, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist and Assistant Editor. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. February 2022
Differential diagnoses
What is pityriasis lichenoides?
Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is an uncommon cutaneous rash of uncertain aetiology. The acute form, pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA), and the chronic form, pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC), sit at either end of a disease spectrum with many patients showing overlapping features.
The eponym Mucha–Habermann disease is sometimes applied to the entire spectrum of PL but is often reserved for the particularly severe ulcero-necrotic variant of PLEVA.
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica on the chest  The mica-like scale in pityriasis lichenoides chronica Widespread truncal pityriasis lichenoides chronica Mica-like scale in pityriasis lichenoides chronica Pityriasis lichenoides acuta on dermoscopy Ulcerated pityriasis lichenoides acuta
Who gets pityriasis lichenoides?
The incidence of PL is unknown, but the disease is rare. It is most common in children and young adults under age 30 but can present at any age. There is a slight male predominance. All races are affected.
What causes pityriasis lichenoides?
The cause of PL is unknown. The main hypotheses are that it may be:
A hypersensitivity reaction to an infection, such as:
Viruses (Epstein-Barr Virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus)
Bacteria (Staphylococcus, Streptococcus)
Parasites (Toxoplasma gondii).
An inflammatory reaction to medication, such as anti-TNF agents, statins, antidepressants, vaccines, and radiocontrast dye.
A low-grade lymphoproliferative disorder.
What are the clinical features of pityriasis lichenoides?
PLEVA presents abruptly with a rapidly progressive rash:
10-50 reddish brown, erythematous, ovoid papules, 5-15mm in diameter
Mainly on the trunk and proximal extremities
Evolution into vesicles, pustules, haemorrhagic crusts, and ulcers
Pruritus or burning sensation
Most cutaneous lesions heal with transient or persistent hyper- or hypo-pigmentation.
Constitutional symptoms are usually mild (see complications below).
PLC presents more slowly over several days with:
Larger numbers of small erythematous papules with a brown hue visible on diascopy
Mica-like scale on more established lesions
Lesions at various stages of evolution
Patients often experience periods of relapse and exacerbation.
Patients often show features of both PLEVA and PLC, and PLEVA may evolve into PLC. Mucosal lesions have been reported.
Pityriasis lichenoides acuta
Ulcerated pityriasis lichenoides acuta Pityriasis lichenoides acuta on the arm Pityriasis lichenoides acuta in a child Ulcerated pityriasis lichenoides acuta on the arm Mucosal ulcers in pityriasis lichenoides acuta Eroded lesions in pityriasis lichenoides acuta
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Dark-skinned patients, particularly children, may present with widespread hypopigmentation and prominent facial involvement. The definitive signs of pityriasis lichenoides may be very subtle.
What are the complications of pityriasis lichenoides?
Ulceronecrotic lesions may heal with varioliform scarring.
A rare severe form of PLEVA (Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha–Habermann Disease) has systemic features of malaise, fever, lymphadenopathy, arthritis, and/or bacteraemia. There may be mucosal, gastrointestinal, and pulmonary involvement. Mortality up to 25% is reported.
The psychological impact should not be overlooked, particularly when skin lesions appear on more easily visible areas such as the face and upper arms.
How is pityriasis lichenoides diagnosed?
The diagnosis can often be made on clinical grounds but is usually confirmed with a skin biopsy, which helps to exclude other important differential diagnoses.
Histological features of PLEVA include:
A wedge-shaped deep dermal and superficial lymphohistiocytic infiltrate
Parakeratotic scale and crust, with thinning of the granular layer
Interface dermatitis with basal cell necrosis and vacuolation
Epidermal spongiosis and necrosis in more developed lesions
Extravasated erythrocytes.
In PLC there is usually:
A superficial dermal infiltrate
Preservation of the granular layer
Focal loss of the dermo-epidermal interface.
Dermoscopy may be useful, particularly to distinguish PLC from guttate psoriasis or pityriasis rosea.
Other tests, such as screening for viral, bacterial, and toxoplasma infection may be considered, depending on the severity of the presentation.
What is the differential diagnosis for pityriasis lichenoides?
Lymphomatoid papulosis
Arthropod bite reactions
Papular acrodermatitis (Gianotti-Crosti syndrome)
Hypopigmented mycosis fungoides
What is the treatment for pityriasis lichenoides?
It is important to recognise that there have been no randomised controlled trials regarding treatment, and the natural history of pityriasis lichenoides makes interpretation of anecdotal reports difficult.
PLEVA is most commonly treated with prolonged courses of erythromycin (in young children) or doxycycline. They are used for their anti-inflammatory effects rather than their antibacterial properties.
Topical corticosteroids are of little value.
Antihistamines may reduce itch.
Phototherapy, usually narrowband UVB, is often the preferred treatment for pityriasis lichenoides chronica.
What is the outcome for pityriasis lichenoides?
Ankad BS, Beergouder SL. Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta in skin of color: new observations by dermoscopy. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2017;7(1):27–34. Published 2017 Jan 31. doi:10.5826/dpc.0701a05. Journal
Bellinato F, Maurelli M, Gisondi P, Girolomoni G. A systematic review of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019;33(11):2039–49. doi:10.1111/jdv.15813. Journal
Bowers S, Warshaw EM. Pityriasis lichenoides and its subtypes. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;55(4):557–76. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2005.07.058. Journal
Jowkar F, Namazi MR, Bahmani M, Monabati A. Triggering of pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta by radiocontrast iodide. J Dermatolog Treat. 2008;19(4):249–50. doi:10.1080/09546630701713493. Journal
Jung F, Sibbald C, Bohdanowicz M, Ingram JR, Piguet V. Systematic review of the efficacies and adverse effects of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides. Br J Dermatol. 2020;183(6):1026–32. doi:10.1111/bjd.18977. Journal
Khachemoune A, Blyumin ML. Pityriasis lichenoides: pathophysiology, classification, and treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2007;8(1):29–36. doi:10.2165/00128071-200708010-00004. Journal
Lane TN, Parker SS. Pityriasis lichenoides chronica in black patients. Cutis. 2010;85(3):125–9. Journal
Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta pathology
Spotlight on Red Scaly Rashes — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Pityriasis lichenoides — Medscape Reference
Pityriasis lichenoides — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pityriasis Versicolor]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pityriasis-versicolor]
Pityriasis versicolor. Tinea versicolor
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor — extra information
Tinea versicolor, Tinea flava
56454009, 29619007, 707291006, 10171000087105, 447178007
Pityriasis versicolor
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated September 2014. DermNet revision August 2021
What is pityriasis versicolor?
Pityriasis versicolor is a common yeast infection of the skin, in which flaky discoloured patches appear on the chest and back.
The term pityriasis is used to describe skin conditions in which the scale appears similar to bran. The multiple colours of pityriasis versicolor give rise to the second part of the name, versicolor. Pityriasis versicolor is sometimes called tinea versicolor, although the term tinea should strictly be used for dermatophyte fungus infections.
Who gets pityriasis versicolor?
Pityriasis versicolor most frequently affects young adults and is slightly more common in men than in women. It can also affect children, adolescents, and older adults.
Pityriasis versicolor is more common in hot, humid climates than in cool, dry climates. It often affects people who perspire heavily. It may clear in the winter months and recur each summer.
Although it is not considered infectious in the conventional sense, pityriasis versicolor sometimes affects more than one member of a family.
What is the cause of pityriasis versicolor?
Pityriasis versicolor is caused by mycelial growth of fungi of the genus Malassezia.
Malassezia are part of the normal skin microbiota (microorganisms found on normal skin). They are dependent on lipid for survival. Fourteen different species of malassezia have been identified. The most common species cultured from pityriasis versicolor are M globosa, M restricta and M sympodialis.
Usually malassezia grow sparsely in the seborrhoeic areas (scalp, face and chest) without causing a rash. It is not known why they sometimes grow more actively on the skin surface to form pityriasis versicolor. One theory implicates a tryptophan-dependent metabolic pathway.
The yeasts induce enlarged melanosomes (pigment granules) within basal melanocytes in the brown type of pityriasis versicolor. It is easier to demonstrate the yeasts in scrapings taken from this type of pityriasis versicolor than in those taken from the white type.
The white or hypopigmented type of pityriasis versicolor is thought to be due to a chemical produced by malassezia that diffuses into the epidermis and impairs the function of the melanocytes.
The pink type of pityriasis versicolor is mildly inflamed, due to dermatiits induced by malassezia or its metabolites.
What are the clinical features of pityriasis versicolor?
Pityriasis versicolor affects the trunk, neck, and/or arms, and is uncommon on other parts of the body. The patches may be coppery brown, paler than surrounding skin, or pink. Pale patches may be more common in darker skin; this appearance is known as pityriasis versicolor alba. Sometimes the patches start scaly and brown, and then resolve through a non-scaly and white stage.
Pityriasis versicolor is usually asymptomatic, but in some people it is mildly itchy.
In general, pale or dark patches due to pityriasis versicolor do not tend to be more or less prone to sunburn than surrounding skin.
Hyperpigmented, hypopigmented, and pink pityriasis versicolor are usually seen as distinct variants but may sometimes co-exist. Pink pityriasis versicolor may also co-exist with seborrhoeic dermatitis as both are associated with malassezia overgrowth.
Pityriasis versicolor Pityriasis versicolor Pityriasis versicolor
How is pityriasis versicolor diagnosed?
Pityriasis versicolor is usually diagnosed clinically. The following tests may be useful.
Wood lamp (black light) examination — yellow-green fluorescence may be observed in affected areas
Dermoscopy of pityriasis versicolor — pallor, background faint pigment network, and scale
Microscopy of a skin scraping (using potassium hydroxide (KOH) to remove skin cells) — hyphae and yeast cells that resemble spaghetti and meatballs
Fungal culture — this is usually reported to be negative, as it is quite difficult to persuade the yeasts to grow in a laboratory
Skin biopsy — fungal elements may be seen within the outer cells of the skin (stratum corneum) on histopathology. Special stains may be required.
Microscopy of Malassezia furfur
What is the treatment of pityriasis versicolor?
Mild pityriasis versicolor is treated with topical antifungal agents.
Selenium sulfide shampoo
Topical azole cream/shampoo (econazole, ketoconazole)
The medicine should be applied widely to the skin from the jawline down and left on the skin for 5-15 minutes before rinsing off in the shower. This should be done daily for one week then weekly for one month.
Oral antifungal agents, itraconazole and fluconazole, are used to treat pityriasis versicolor when extensive or if topical agents have failed.
Oral terbinafine, an antifungal agent used to treat dermatophyte infections, is not effective for yeast infections such as pityriasis versicolor.
Preventative measures
Reapplication of a topical treatment such as selenium sulfide shampoo every month once the rash has cleared will usually prevent recurrence.
What is the outlook for pityriasis versicolor?
Pityriasis versicolor generally clears satisfactorily with treatment but often recurs when conditions are right for malassezia to proliferate. The fine surface scale is the indication of active infection and once this has disappeared, infection is no longer ongoing. The colour may persist for weeks or months, particularly the hypopigmentation, and do not indicate treatment failure.
Pityriasis versicolor often recurs when the weather becomes warm and humid again. Regular use of topical treatment minimises this risk.
Cantrell WC, Elewksi BE. Can pityriasis versicolor be treated with 2% ketoconazole foam?. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13(7):855–9. Journal
Gaitanis G, Magiatis P, Hantschke M, Bassukas ID, Velegraki A. The Malassezia genus in skin and systemic diseases. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2012;25(1):106–41. doi:10.1128/CMR.00021-11. PubMed Central
Gupta AK, Foley KA. Antifungal treatment for pityriasis versicolor. J Fungi (Basel). 2015;1(1):13–29. doi:10.3390/jof1010013. Journal
Kallini JR, Riaz F, Khachemoune A. Tinea versicolor in dark-skinned individuals. Int J Dermatol. 2014;53(2):137–41. doi:10.1111/ijd.12345. PubMed
Thoma W, Krämer HJ, Mayser P. Pityriasis versicolor alba. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2005;19(2):147–52. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.01085.x. PubMed
Skin conditions associated with malassezia
Fungal skin infections
Pityriasis versicolor pathology
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Tinea versicolor — Medscape Reference
Pityriasis Versicolor — British Association of Dermatologists
Tinea versicolor — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Pyogenic Granuloma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/pyogenic-granuloma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Pyogenic granuloma — extra information
Reactive haemangioma, Granuloma pyogenicum, Granuloma telangiectaticum, Granuloma gravidarum, Pregnancy tumour, Epulis gravidarum
2F26, DA01.2Y, DA0D.Y
200722003, 39629007, 403961004, 235002009, 76813008, 713249002
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Dr Malini Sivasaththivel, RMO, Eastern Health, Box Hill, Australia; Dr Smriti Tandon, Dermatology Registrar, Eastern Health, Box Hill, Australia; Dr Lena Ly, Dermatologist, Eastern Health, Box Hill, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. January 2021.
Dermoscopic features
Differential diagnoses
What is a pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma is an acquired benign proliferation of capillary blood vessels of the skin and oral cavity. The name is a misnomer as it is a form of lobular capillary haemangioma, not due to infection. Pyogenic granuloma has many synonyms including granuloma gravidarum or pregnancy tumour when occurring in pregnancy.
Pyogenic granuloma Pyogenic granuloma Pyogenic granuloma
Who gets pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma often occurs in children around 6 years of age and during teenage and young adult life. There is an overall male predominance (3:2) except for oral lesions due to their association with pregnancy and oral contraceptive use. There is no racial predilection.
What causes pyogenic granuloma?
Factors associated with the development of a pyogenic granuloma may include:
Trauma — recent minor trauma accounts for 7% of presentations and, in the oral cavity, chronic minor irritation is thought to be a common trigger. Nasal piercings are reported in association with intranasal pyogenic granuloma.
Hormonal influences — can occur with oral contraceptive use and in 5% of pregnancies.
Medications — oral retinoids, protease inhibitors (used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS), targeted cancer therapies, and immunosuppression.
Infection — Staphylococcus aureus is frequently detected. In the oral cavity, poor dental hygiene is a common association. There is no evidence for a viral aetiology.
What are the clinical features of pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma of the skin presents as a painless red fleshy nodule, typically 5-10mm in diameter, that grows rapidly over a few weeks. The surface is initially smooth but can ulcerate, become crusty, or verrucous. Pyogenic granuloma is usually solitary, but multiple nodules and satellite lesions can erupt. The most common sites involved are the fingers and face. Pyogenic granuloma easily bleeds with minor trauma.
Oral mucosal pyogenic granulomas typically develop on the lip and gums (gingiva) as pedunculated or sessile slow-growing painless red papules ranging in size from a few millimetres to several centimetres. The surface can be ulcerated with a yellow-fibrinous surface, and easy bleeding. With time, the lesion becomes a paler pink colour. Other mucosal sites that can be affected include the conjunctiva and nasal mucosa.
New lesion 2 weeks later 4 weeks after first photograph
What are the dermoscopic features of pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma has a distinct keratinised border forming a white collarette. Vascular structures are usually present and there are red homogenous areas with no clear lacunar pattern. White linear ‘rail lines’ are an important feature.
Pyogenic granuloma dermoscopy Red clods separated by white lines in pyogenic granuloma
What are the complications of pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma can bleed profusely and frequently with minor trauma, resulting in anaemia.
Oral pyogenic granuloma can rarely cause significant bone loss.
How is pyogenic granuloma diagnosed?
Histology of pyogenic granuloma shows a prominent lobular capillary arrangement in the dermis. The overlying epidermis may be thinned or ulcerated, and the peripheral collarette is formed by elongated rete ridges and eccrine ducts. Inflammatory changes and signs of haemorrhage are secondary.
Dermal lobular arrangement of capillaries
There are two distinct histological types of oral pyogenic granuloma. In addition to the lobular capillary haemangioma pattern, a second type shows a distinct granulation tissue-like vascular proliferation which is postulated to have a different aetiology and evolution.
What is the differential diagnosis for pyogenic granuloma?
The clinical differential diagnosis of cutaneous pyogenic granuloma includes:
Bacillary angiomatosis.
Amelanotic or hypomelanotic melanoma is the most important differential diagnosis even on dermoscopy with many shared features.
The differential diagnosis of oral cavity pyogenic granuloma includes the above, as well as the site-specific peripheral giant cell granuloma and peripheral ossifying fibroma.
The differential diagnosis on histology includes cherry angioma and bacillary angiomatosis.
What is the treatment for pyogenic granuloma?
Treating or removing triggering factors is important to minimise the risk of recurrence. This may include:
Ceasing drug triggers
Careful oral hygiene
Dental treatment of oral trauma caused by teeth
Removal of adjacent piercings.
Topical treatment of pyogenic granuloma
Timolol gel 0.5% and other topical (or oral) beta-blockers
Intralesional steroid injection
Table salt therapy — table salt is applied under occlusion after protecting the surrounding skin with yellow soft paraffin.
Procedural treatment of pyogenic granuloma
Curettage and cautery
Vascular and ablative lasers
What is the outcome for pyogenic granuloma?
Pyogenic granuloma rarely resolves spontaneously except post-partum for lesions associated with pregnancy. Recurrence is common, especially for gingival lesions, after inadequate treatment or persistent aetiological factors.
Calonje E. Soft tissue tumours and tumour-like conditions. In: Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker T, Chalmers R, Creamer D (eds). Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology, 9th edn. Wiley Blackwell, 2016: 137.26–8.
Daruwalla SB, Ghate S, Dhurat R. Establishing the efficacy and safety of the novel use of common salt for the treatment of pyogenic granuloma. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021;46(7):1243-1247. doi:10.1111/ced.14658 Journal
Jafarzadeh H, Sanatkhani M, Mohtasham N. Oral pyogenic granuloma: a review. J Oral Sci. 2006;48(4):167–75. doi:10.2334/josnusd.48.167. PubMed
Patterson JW. Weedon’s Skin Pathology, 5th edn. Elsevier, 2020: p1144–5.
Plachouri KM, Georgiou S. Therapeutic approaches to pyogenic granuloma: an updated review. Int J Dermatol. 2019;58(6):642–8. doi:10.1111/ijd.14268. PubMed
Zaballos P, Carulla M, Ozdemir F, et al. Dermoscopy of pyogenic granuloma: a morphological study. Br J Dermatol. 2010;163(6):1229–37. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10040.x. PubMed
Bacillary angiomatosis pathology
Cherry angioma pathology
Dermal and subcutaneous lesions
Dermatoscopy of other non-melanocytic lesions
Pulsed dye laser treatment
Dermatologic Manifestations of Pyogenic Granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma) — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Pyogenic Granuloma — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rashes Affecting The Lower Legs]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rashes-affecting-the-lower-legs]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rashes affecting the lower legs
Rashes affecting the lower legs — extra information
Skin eruptions of the lower extremity
L30.9, L08.9, L97.90
271807003, 724877007, 279324004, 430348006, 402255002, 95344007, 711168000
Rashes affecting the lower legs
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley MBChB FRACP, Dept of Dermatology Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2004. Reviewed and revised, May 2014.
Scaly rashes of the lower legs
Redness of the lower legs
Most often, a rash affecting the lower legs is a type of dermatitis. The terms ‘dermatitis’ and ‘eczema’ are often used interchangeably. Acute dermatitis presents as red, swollen and blistered plaques. Chronic dermatitis accompanied by rubbing and scratching results in darkened (hyperpigmented), and thickened (lichenified) plaques.
There are several different types of lower leg dermatitis:
Gravitational dermatitis
Autonomic denervation dermatitis
Pretibial pruritic papular dermatitis
Scaly rashes of the lower legs
Scaly conditions affecting the lower legs include:
Superficial basal cell carcinomas
Psoriasis Lichen planus Superficial basal cell carcinomas
Infections favouring the lower legs
Cellulitis Folliculitis Tinea corporis
Redness of the lower legs
Other red or purplish conditions favouring the lower legs include:
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Pretibial myxoedema Panniculitis Necrobiosis lipoidica Vasculitis Capillaritis
Detailed descriptions of leg ulcers
Differential diagnosis of leg ulcers
Management of lower leg rashes
Management depends on making a correct diagnosis. General advice should include:
Avoid and treat dry skin, using non-soap cleansers and thick simple emollients. Avoid exposing the legs to direct heat or the hot air of the heater in a car.
Minimise swelling – avoid standing for prolonged periods, take regular walks, elevate the feet when sitting or overnight and wear special graduated compression stockings long term.
Prescription treatments may include oral antibiotics for secondary infection and topical steroids of varying potency – weak products can be used long term if necessary but potent topical steroids should be used once or twice daily for short courses of one to four weeks.
Obesity-associated lymphoedematous mucinosis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Raynaud Phenomenon]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/raynaud-phenomenon]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Raynaud phenomenon — extra information
Raynaud disease, Vasospastic disease, Raynaud syndrome
Blood vessel problems
BD42.Z, BD42.0, BD42.1, BD42.2
195295006, 361131008, 356198000, 403674007
Blood vessel problems
Author: Dr Paul Maurice, Dermatologist, Dept of Dermatology, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2004. DermNet revision July 2021
What is Raynaud phenomenon?
Raynaud phenomenon is an episodic reduction in the blood supply to the fingers, toes, or nipple occurring mainly in response to cold (vasospastic disease).
Who gets Raynaud phenomenon?
Raynaud phenomenon can be divided into two main types:
Primary Raynaud phenomenon, also known as Raynaud Disease. This is not associated with any other conditions. It affects at least one in five young women, and is less common in males, children and older individuals. It as an exaggeration of the normal response of the circulation to cold.
Secondary Raynaud phenomenon has the same symptoms due to an identifiable cause or condition.
Patients with secondary Raynaud phenomenon often have the symptoms of an associated condition (see below) or are on medication that can cause Raynaud phenomenon as a side effect.
What causes secondary Raynaud phenomenon?
Connective tissue diseases
Connective tissue diseases are believed to be due to disordered regulation of the immune system. The underlying connective tissue disease may not be apparent when Raynaud phenomenon first occurs.
Systemic sclerosis (a systemic form of scleroderma) is the most likely connective tissue disease to present with Raynaud phenomenon, especially the CREST syndrome form: calcinosis, Raynaud, (o)esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly, telangiectasis. Ulceration of the fingertips may occur if vasospasm is severe.
Raynaud phenomenon also occurs in systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, Sjögren syndrome, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
Medications that may aggravate or cause Raynaud phenomenon include beta-blockers (widely used for angina, high blood pressure, or anxiety), migraine remedies containing ergotamine or methysergide, bleomycin and other chemotherapy agents (for cancer treatment), clonidine (for high blood pressure, migraine, or flushing), bromocriptine (for Parkinsonism and some other conditions), imipramine (for depression), and rarely, the oral contraceptive pill. If medication is the cause, stopping it can result in rapid improvement.
Raynaud phenomenon may sometimes indicate underlying atherosclerosis and Buerger disease, especially in smokers.
Raynaud phenomenon may develop in a limb affected by a stroke and can also occur in multiple sclerosis and polio. Rarely, Raynaud phenomenon is due to an extra rib causing compression on nerves and blood vessels.
Occupations associated with Raynaud phenomenon include construction workers using a vibrating tool (eg, pneumatic drill) and industrial workers exposed to vinyl chloride polymerisation processes. [see Vibration white finger]
Miscellaneous causes
Disorders that increase the viscosity (thickness) of the blood can also cause Raynaud phenomenon, by reducing blood flow through the small blood vessels in the fingers and toes.
Raynaud phenomenon has been associated with hypothyroidism.
What are the clinical features of Raynaud phenomenon?
An attack of Raynaud phenomenon is triggered by exposure to cold, such as going out into a cold wind or immersing the hands in cold water. Sudden emotional or psychological upsets can also bring on an attack. The hands are most often affected, but it sometimes involves the feet and occasionally the nipples, nasal tip, or earlobes.
Typically, one or more fingers will turn white and numb and, on rewarming, blue due to a sluggish blood flow. This is sometimes followed by a bright red colour and swelling due to a compensatory increase in blood flow before the normal skin colour and sensation are restored.
Attacks may be painful and can last from minutes to hours.
Raynaud phenomenon of the nipples presents as breast pain, often associated with pregnancy or lactation. It may follow breast surgery. Typically it presents as extremely painful or throbbing breastfeeding precipitated by exposure to cold, and the usual sequential two or three colour phases of blanching, blueness and/or erythema.
Raynaud phenomenon  Systemic sclerosis
What are the complications of Raynaud phenomenon?
Severe untreated Raynaud phenomenon can rarely result in permanent damage to the affected extremities.
What is Raynaud phenomenon diagnosed?
Raynaud phenomenon is a clinical diagnosis but it is important to consider potential causes.
You should seek medical advice for the following reasons:
Raynaud phenomenon, although harmless in the more common primary form, can be an uncomfortable and treatment may reduce symptoms
Onset of Raynaud phenomenon after the age of 25 years without cold intolerance in childhood
It is important to diagnose diseases associated with secondary Raynaud phenomenon at an early stage. Serological blood tests can also predict the chance of developing a connective tissue disease in the future.
A history and thorough examination, including nail fold capillaroscopy, should be undertaken to determine if symptoms are due to primary or secondary Raynaud phenomenon. Investigations may include blood tests, X-rays, or other types of imaging.
What is the treatment for Raynaud phenomenon?
Smoking cessation. Nicotine impairs the circulation by constricting the blood vessels and by making the blood flow in peripheral areas like the fingers sluggish for several hours.
Try to avoid activities that you know from experience are likely to trigger an attack.
Wear warm gloves, thick socks and slippers.
Helpful gadgets include hand and foot warmers and insulated drinking glasses. Nasal warmers can help the erythema of nasal Raynaud.
Counselling or relaxation therapy may help if stress or emotional upsets are triggering factors.
Swinging your arms around during an attack may help to restore the circulation to your fingers.
Specific medical measures
Diagnosis of any underlying disease, or predisposition to disease, may lead to specific treatment. Drugs causing vasoconstriction should be discontinued, if possible.
First line medications for primary Raynaud phenomenon include calcium channel blockers, such as nifedipine or diltiazem. Verapamil appears ineffective. The calcium channel blockers act by dilating the small blood vessels, thereby increasing the blood flow to the peripheries. The dose may be gradually increased if necessary. It is important that blood pressure is monitored.
There are promising reports that botulinum toxin injections into the neurovascular bundles at the palmar arch at the base of the digits result in rapid reduction in pain and can heal digital ulcers.
Very severe disease that is resulting in ulceration or resorption of the fingertips may be treated by an intravenous infusion of prostacyclin. This requires admission to hospital for a few days.
A very small minority of patients with severe and intractable Raynaud phenomenon may require a sympathectomy. This involves cutting the nerves that constrict the peripheral blood vessels. The procedure may have complications and has a fairly low success rate, so should only be considered if all else has failed.
What is the outcome for Raynaud phenomenon?
Depending on the cause, Raynaud phenomenon may persist for a long time or may improve spontaneously.
Anderson JE, Held N, Wright K. Raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple: a treatable cause of painful breastfeeding. Pediatrics. 2004;113(4):e360–4. doi:10.1542/peds.113.4.e360. Journal
Bakst R, Merola JF, Franks AG Jr, Sanchez M. Raynaud's phenomenon: pathogenesis and management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008 Oct;59(4):633–53. Medline.
Yan CK, Madan V. An inexpensive and effective device to manage nasal Raynaud and rosacea overlap symptoms. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2024;49(12):1709–11. PubMed
Żebryk P, Puszczewicz MJ. Botulinum toxin A in the treatment of Raynaud’s phenomenon: a systematic review. Archives of Medical Science : AMS. 2016;12(4):864–70. doi:10.5114/aoms.2015.48152. Journal
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Skin signs and systemic disease
Raynaud Association, Inc.
Raynaud and Scleroderma Association
International Scleroderma Network
Raynaud's Phenomenon — Medscape Reference
Raynaud Phenomenon — emedicinehealth
Raynauds and Scleroderma Ireland
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Reactive Perforating Collagenosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/reactive-perforating-collagenosis]
Reactive perforating collagenosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Reactive perforating collagenosis
Reactive perforating collagenosis — extra information
64036004, 403402000, 402683008
Reactive perforating collagenosis
Authors: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2005; Updated: Dr Aswan Tai, Junior Doctor, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia; Dr Sarah Smithson, Dermatologist, Skin Health Institute, Melbourne, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. September 2021
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is reactive perforating collagenosis?
Reactive perforating collagenosis is the most common type of primary perforating dermatosis. It is characterised by the transepithelial elimination of collagen from the dermis through the epidermis to the skin surface.
Reactive perforating collagenosis
Who gets reactive perforating collagenosis?
Familial reactive perforating collagenosis
Onset is usually in infancy or early childhood
Acquired reactive perforating collagenosis
Onset is usually in adulthood
Female predominance 3:1
No clear racial predilection
Strong association with diabetes mellitus and chronic renal disease; 10% of haemodialysis patients develop reactive perforating collagenosis
Other reported associations include concurrent itchy dermatoses, malignancies, pregnancy and endocrine disorders, infections and infestations, and medications
What causes reactive perforating collagenosis?
The pathogenesis of reactive perforating collagenosis is unclear.
The inherited form appears to be due to a genetic abnormality in collagen causing focal damage and extrusion through the epidermis. Cold weather and skin trauma typically trigger or aggravate the skin lesions.
Microvascular insufficiency and elevated fibronectin levels in plasma, as seen with diabetes and renal failure, may play a role in the acquired form. Another theory suggests microdeposition of substances and abnormal glycosylation of collagen I and III in diabetes alter collagen fibres.
Superficial trauma, such as scratching, and cold leads to necrobiosis and epidermal thinning in susceptible patients.
What are the clinical features of reactive perforating collagenosis?
Reactive perforating collagenosis is a papulonodular mucocutaneous disorder with adherent keratotic plugs and crusts.
Red-brown umbilicated papules and nodules, often with a cup-shaped depression, central keratotic crust, and erythematous halo
Variable in shape and size, usually up to 10 mm in diameter; a rare giant form has been described with individual lesions up to 10 cm in diameter
Lesions are typically intensely itchy; pain or tenderness is rare
Koebner phenomenon is a common feature
Commonly located on trunk or extensor aspect of the limbs but can be widespread occurring anywhere on the skin
Hands, elbows, and knees are the common initial sites involved in the inherited form
Mucosal lesions have been described
Variable phenotype in the familial form, even within the one family
Clinical features of reactive perforating collagenosis
Nodules with keratotic crust Nodule with keratotic plug and erythematous halo Keratotic papules with koebnerisation
Dermoscopy features of reactive perforating collagenosis
The dermoscopy features of reactive perforating collagenosis are characteristic and consistent:
Yellow-brown structureless area in the centre of the lesion matching the central crust
White rim of variable thickness around the central crust indicating keratinous debris or epidermal invagination
Outer pink circle with short looped and peripheral dotted vessels corresponding with dermal inflammation.
Reactive perforating collagenosis: dermoscopy
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Reactive perforating collagenosis in skin of colour is associated with hyperpigmentation:
Of lesions secondary to scratching
Following resolution of lesions.
Hyperpigmentation related to reactive perforating collagenosis in skin of colour
Hyperpigmented scratch marks Hyperpigmented keratotic papules Hyperpigmentation around keratotic papule
What are the complications of reactive perforating collagenosis?
Impact of chronic itch on quality of life
Secondary bacterial skin infection
Healing of individual lesions with scarring and/or dyspigmentation in all skin types
How is reactive perforating collagenosis diagnosed?
Reactive perforating collagenosis can usually be diagnosed on its distinct clinical features and associated conditions, and confirmed on dermoscopy.
Multiple skin biopsies examined with multiple levels may be required to find the diagnostic histology [see Reactive perforating collagenosis pathology].
What is the differential diagnosis for reactive perforating collagenosis?
Other primary perforating dermatoses — elastosis perforans serpiginosa, Kyrle disease, perforating folliculitis
Secondary perforating disorders including granuloma annulare, lichen nitidus, chromoblastomycosis
What is the treatment for reactive perforating collagenosis?
The main aim of treatment for reactive perforating collagenosis is to reduce itch and minimise skin trauma:
Topical — emollients, topical steroids, topical retinoids
Systemic — antihistamines, oral retinoids, allopurinol
Other — phototherapy.
Treatment of individual lesions
Intralesional steroids
Treatment of the associated systemic condition
What is the outcome for reactive perforating collagenosis?
Reactive perforating collagenosis remains confined to the skin.
Familial reactive perforating collagenosis is a lifelong condition with lesions becoming larger and more numerous with age.
Individual lesions in both the familial and acquired forms are self-healing but often recur.
Bhat YJ, Manzoor S, Qayoom S, Wani R, Baba AN, Bhat AH. Familial reactive perforating collagenosis. Indian J Dermatol. 2009;54(4):334–7. doi:10.4103/0019-5154.57608. Journal
Karpouzis A, Giatromanolaki A, Sivridis E, Kouskoukis C. Acquired reactive perforating collagenosis: current status. J Dermatol. 2010;37(7):585–92. doi:10.1111/j.1346-8138.2010.00918.x. PubMed
Lukács J, Schliemann S, Elsner P. Treatment of acquired reactive perforating dermatosis - a systematic review. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2018;16(7):825–42. doi:10.1111/ddg.13561. PubMed
Ormerod E, Atwan A, Intzedy L, Stone N. Dermoscopy features of acquired reactive perforating collagenosis: a case series. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2018;8(4):303–5. doi:10.5826/dpc.0804a11. PubMed Central
Rapini RP, Herbert AA, Drucker CR. Acquired perforating dermatosis. Evidence for combined transepidermal elimination of both collagen and elastic fibers. Arch Dermatol. 1989;125(8):1074–8. doi:10.1001/archderm.125.8.1074. PubMed
Satchell AC, Crotty K, Lee S. Reactive perforating collagenosis: a condition that may be underdiagnosed. Australas J Dermatol. 2001;42(4):284–7. doi:10.1046/j.1440-0960.2001.00537.x. PubMed
Drug-induced pruritus
Paraneoplastic pruritus
Skin problems associated with diabetes mellitus
The differential diagnosis of itchy skin
Familial reactive perforating collagenosis — OMIM
Reactive perforating collagenosis — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Recurrent Fissuring Of Posterior Fourchette]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/recurrent-fissuring-of-posterior-fourchette]
Recurrent fissuring of posterior fourchette (vaginal splitting or tearing)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Recurrent fissuring of posterior fourchette
Recurrent fissuring of posterior fourchette — extra information
Vulvar granuloma fissuratum
276462003, 28271003, 61850009
Recurrent fissuring of posterior fourchette
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2011. Reviewed by Dr Jennifer Bradford, Gynaecologist, Sydney, Australia.
What is fissuring of the posterior fourchette?
The posterior fourchette is a thin fork-shaped fold of skin designed to stretch at the bottom of the entrance to the vagina. However, it sometimes fails to stretch properly, and instead splits. This is a cause of recurrent vulval pain. Pain from fissuring is often described as being 'like a paper-cut' or 'knife-like'.
Recurrent fissuring has been previously called vulval or vulvar granuloma fissuratum.
What causes fissuring of the posterior fourchette?
The splitting occurs when the vulva stretches, particularly during sexual intercourse. This may be because the skin is stiff, inflamed, fragile, or for unknown reasons.
Posterior fourchette fissuring may be primary, i.e., no underlying skin disease is diagnosed, or secondary to an infection or inflammatory skin disease. Common causes include:
Vulvovaginitis due to Candida albicans (thrush)
Herpes simplex infection (genital herpes)
Atrophic vulvovaginitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Delayed healing of tear or episiotomy wound following childbirth
Pelvic floor muscle tension leading to vaginismus.
Laceration of the posterior fourchette may also be due to straddle injury, violence or rape; in these situations bruising and other injuries may also be present.
Similar symptoms experienced in the absence of fissuring or other visible signs may be described as vulvodynia or vestibulodynia.
What are the clinical features of posterior fourchette fissures?
Most women who present with posterior fourchette fissures are sexually active and symptoms follow intercourse. Symptoms may be mild, moderate, or severe in intensity, usually resolve within a few days, and may include:
Pain on vaginal penetration during intercourse (dyspareunia)
Pain on insertion of a vaginal tampon
Pain during vaginal examination
Bleeding or spotting
Affected women may be premenopausal or postmenopausal. Fissuring can occur at the first attempt at sexual intercourse or many years later, in women who have had children or who have never had children. They may also have other symptoms, including fissures in the skin folds elsewhere in the vulva.
Deep, wide ulceration
Redness of surrounding tissue
The vulva may appear entirely normal if the examination takes place after the fissure has healed. But often, a new fissure can appear while gently stretching the vulva.
How is posterior fourchette fissuring diagnosed?
Specific tests are often unnecessary if the history and appearance are typical.
Swabs may be taken to look for vaginal infections such as bacterial vaginosis and Candida albicans, for sexually transmitted infections or herpes virus.
Biopsy may show typical features of the underlying skin disorder. The histopathology of primary fissuring usually reveals nonspecific submucosal chronic inflammation; the clinician may consider the report nondiagnostic. Granuloma formation is rare. Scar tissue may be present.
What is the treatment for fissuring of the posterior fourchette?
If an underlying infection or skin condition is diagnosed, specific treatment is usually very helpful. Examples include:
Antifungal creams or antifungal tablets for candidiasis
Antivirals such as aciclovir, famciclovir or valaciclovir for genital herpes
Intravaginal oestrogen cream for hormone deficiency states during menopause or lactation
Topical steroids for dermatitis or lichenoid disorders.
Women with mild symptoms due to primary fissuring of the posterior fourchette may benefit from:
Avoidance of irritants such as soap, spermicide cream, irritating lubricants or rough panty liners
Application of vaginal moisturisers and bland emollients such as petroleum jelly
Warm Sitz baths with bath oil
Liberal lubrication with oil during sexual activity (water-based lubricant should be used with condoms as oils may cause these to disintegrate)
Topical anaesthetic application (lignocaine jelly or ointment)
Woman-on-top or man-behind positioning
Pelvic floor relaxation exercises.
Women with severe symptoms from primary fissuring of the posterior fourchette may consider vulval surgery. Perineoplasty is a surgical procedure that is usually undertaken under general anaesthesia. The fissured skin is completely cut out and replaced by vaginal epithelium that has been undermined then advanced to cover the defect without tension. It is stitched up from front to back. Perineoplasty may allow women with posterior fourchette fissuring to resume normal and painless sexual activity but is not always successful.
Edwards L. Vulvar fissures: causes and therapy. Dermatol Ther. 2004;17(1):111–16. doi:10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04011.x. PubMed
Kennedy CM, Dewdney S, Galask RP. Vulvar granuloma fissuratum: a description of fissuring of the posterior fourchette and the repair. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;105(5 Pt 1):1018–23. doi:10.1097/01.AOG.0000158863.70819.53. PubMed
Kennedy CM, Manion E, Galask RP, Benda J. Histopathology of recurrent mechanical fissure of the fourchette. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009;104(3):246–7. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2008.10.017. PubMed Central
Genital skin problems
Painful sex (dyspareunia)
Dysaesthetic vulvodynia
Vulvovaginal Disorders: an algorithm for basic adult diagnosis and treatment — ISSVD
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rheumatic Fever]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rheumatic-fever]
Rheumatic fever, erythema marginatum
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rheumatic fever — extra information
I00, I01, I02.5, L53.2, I01.9, I09.9, I01.2
1B40.Z, EA50.0, 1B40.Y, BC20.1, 1B41.Z, 1B42
58718002, 14175009, 60261000, 26424001, 38933006, 703119002, 240041006, 200951007, 312591002, 24363009, 46826000
Author: Marie Hartley, Staff Writer, 2010. Latest update by Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate Student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University London, United Kingdom, July 2016.
What is acute rheumatic fever?
The skin sign of acute rheumatic fever is erythema marginatum.
Who gets rheumatic fever?
Rheumatic fever is associated with poverty, overcrowding and poor sanitation facilities. It is suspected that there are genes that make some families more susceptible to the disease.
What are the clinical features of acute rheumatic fever?
Symptoms of ARF generally develop several weeks after an episode of streptococcal pharyngitis. However, many patients do not recall having a sore throat. Non-specific symptoms include:
ARF causes a variety of more specific clinical features:
Polyarthritis (multiple inflamed joints) — Most often ankles, knees, elbows, wrists. Arthritis can migrate from one joint to another.
Carditis (inflammation of the heart) – This involves the heart valves, heart muscle, and membrane surrounding the heart.
Sydenham chorea – This is a disorder of the nervous system characterised by personality changes, muscle weakness, and involuntary movements.
Skin signs in ARF may include:
Subcutaneous nodules (small lumps under the skin) – These are uncommon, occurring in less than 2% of patients with ARF. The painless nodules are found over joints (such as the elbows, knees, ankles, and knuckles), the back of the scalp, and the vertebrae (backbone). The nodules are firm, round, mobile, and range from 0.5-2 cm in size. The nodules are usually only found when severe carditis is present. They usually resolve within one month but may persist for longer.
Erythema marginatum Erythema marginatum Erythema marginatum
What are the complications of acute rheumatic fever?
The most severe complication of recurrent ARF is permanent damage to heart valves, known as rheumatic heart disease. The disease can result in permanent damage to:
Heart valves, particularly the mitral valve and aortic valve, which can lead to valvular stenosis and/or regurgitation.
Heart muscles, reducing pumping action ie causing heart failure.
The membrane around the heart, causing pericarditis.
Irregular heart rhythms, such as atrial fibrillation.
How is acute rheumatic fever diagnosed?
The diagnosis of ARF is challenging, as there are no clinical features or diagnostic tests available to confirm or rule out this condition. Instead, the diagnosis is made using the Jones criteria. These criteria require evidence of a preceding group A streptococcus infection, and various combinations of the characteristic features above and other non-specific clinical features. A detailed explanation of these criteria (and modifications for the New Zealand environment) can be found on the National Heart Foundation of New Zealand website.
Tests to confirm evidence of a group A streptococcal infection include:
Blood tests to look for elevated or rising antibodies to group A streptococcus. The most commonly used tests are the plasma antistreptolysin O and the antideoxyribonuclease B titres.
Culture of throat swabs and rapid antigen tests for group A streptococcus are less accurate.
Other tests used in the assessment of a patient with suspected ARF include:
Blood tests – markers of inflammation, such as ESR or CRP, may be raised
Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram to identify heart involvement
Doppler and colour flow mapping to detect minor valvular defects not evident clinically
What is the treatment for rheumatic fever?
Following a diagnosis of rheumatic fever, it is standard practice to treat the group A streptococcal infection that led to the disease with oral penicillin (although this practice has not been proven to alter long-term outcomes).
Following the initial attack, patients are treated with continuous penicillin to prevent further streptococcal colonisation or infection and additional damage to the heart. Continuous penicillin is also recommended for people with established rheumatic heart disease. Continuous penicillin is generally given by injection every four weeks for a minimum of 10 years. Some patients, such as those with severe carditis, may require lifelong treatment.
Patients with rheumatic heart disease may occasionally require heart surgery to repair or replace damaged heart valves.
Can rheumatic fever be prevented?
ARF can be prevented with timely treatment of group A streptococcal pharyngitis, particularly in people aged 5-15 years. People with sore throat and fever should see the doctor for advice. Vaccines are currently in development and are eagerly awaited.
Cilliers AM. Rheumatic fever and its management. BMJ 2006;333:1153-6. PubMed.
New Zealand Rheumatic Fever Writing Group. New Zealand Guidelines for Rheumatic Fever. 1. Diagnosis, Management and Secondary Prevention. National Heart Foundation of New Zealand and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand. 2006. – Heart Foundation
Rheumatic Fever – eMedicine Specialties, Infectious Diseases, Cardiovascular and Intravascular Infections
Burke JB. Erythema marginatum. Archives of disease in childhood. 1955 Aug;30(152):359. PubMed.
Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, Sable CA, Shulman ST, Carapetis J, Remenyi B, Taubert KA, Bolger AF, Beerman L, Mayosi BM, Beaton A, Pandian NG, Kaplan EL; American Heart Association Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Revision of the Jones Criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015 May 19;131(20):1806–18. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000205. Epub 2015 Apr 23. PubMed PMID: 25908771.
Saxena A. Diagnosis of rheumatic fever: current status of Jones Criteria and role of echocardiography. The Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2000 Apr 1;67(4):283–6. PubMed.
Behera M. Subcutaneous nodules in acute rheumatic fever--an analysis of age old dictums. Indian Heart Journal. 1992 Dec;45(6):463–7. PubMed.
Streptococcal infection
Other websitesMedscape Reference:
Streptococcus Group A Infections — Infectious Diseases
Rheumatic fever — Pediatrics: General Medicine, Rheumatology
Acute Rheumatic Fever — Rheumatology, Miscellaneous Inflammatory Arthritis
Dermatologic Manifestations of Cardiac Disease — Dermatology, Internal Medicine
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rheumatoid Arthritis And The Skin]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rheumatoid-arthritis-and-the-skin]
Rheumatoid arthritis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rheumatoid arthritis and the skin
Rheumatoid arthritis and the skin — extra information
Atrophic arthritis, Rheumatic gout, RA, Rheumatoid disease, RhA, Proliferative arthritis
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
M06.9, M05, M05.9, M05.20, M05.00, M06.3, M05.2
FA20.Z, 4A44.Y, EB2Y, FA20.0
69896004, 57160007, 239792003, 239791005, 402431009, 402426007, 402427003, 33719002, 402428008, 52661003, 56940005, 400054000, 229941000, 724834006, 773732005
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Rheumatoid arthritis and the skin
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2006. DermNet Update January 2021. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell.
Rheumatoid arthritis-specific skin manifestations
Cutaneous adverse effects of treatment
What is rheumatoid arthritis?
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic systemic inflammatory autoimmune disease characterised by a symmetric destructive polyarthritis and extra-articular manifestations including skin changes.
Skin changes of rheumatoid arthritis can be classified as:
General cutaneous manifestations
Rheumatoid arthritis-related skin disease
Rheumatoid arthritis-specific skin disease
Adverse cutaneous effects of treatment.
Who gets rheumatoid arthritis?
Rheumatoid arthritis predominantly affects females (3:1) with an increased risk for those with a first-degree relative affected. The prevalence is estimated to be 1%. Rheumatoid arthritis affects all races. The peak age of onset is 35–50 years. Extra-articular involvement develops in approximately 40%, and skin changes in 30%.
What causes rheumatoid arthritis?
Rheumatoid arthritis is multifactorial in origin. Although regarded as autoimmune with anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) and rheumatoid factor (RF), genetic and environmental factors are also important in the pathogenesis. In ACPA-positive disease the most significant association is mapped to the HLA-DRB4 gene. ACPA are found in 60% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (seropositive).
What are the clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis?
Articular features of rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis initially affects the small joints, such as those in the hands, but in later stages can affect any joint. It presents as episodic flares of symmetrical synovitis (swelling, redness, pain of joints), morning stiffness, and enthesitis. Untreated, it progresses to irreversible joint destruction with loss of cartilage and bone.
Cutaneous features of rheumatoid arthritis
General cutaneous manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis
Atrophic (thin, wrinkled) skin, which is fragile and easy to bruise
Pale, translucent skin on the backs of the hands
Palmar erythema (red palms)
Nail changes – brittle nails, onycholysis, nail ridging and splitting, clubbing, ventral pterygium.
Rheumatoid arthritis-related skin diseases
Dermatoses may link with rheumatoid arthritis, but can also occur in association with other conditions.
Neutrophilic dermatoses — Sweet syndrome, pyoderma gangrenosum
Granulomatous dermatitis — interstitial granulomatous dermatitis, palisading neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis
Erythema elevatum diutinum
Rheumatoid arthritis-specific skin manifestations
These are skin conditions that occur only in association with rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatoid nodules are the most common extra-articular manifestation of rheumatoid arthritis, affecting 35–40% of patients, particularly Caucasian males. Approximately 90% are positive for rheumatoid factor. They present as solitary or multiple skin-coloured nodules on sites of recurrent pressure or trauma such as the forearm, elbow, fingers, heels, and back, and range in size up to several centimetres across.
Rheumatoid nodules are generally asymptomatic. Complications can include infection, ulceration, and gangrene. Histology is characteristic [see Rheumatoid nodule pathology].
Rheumatoid nodulosis
Rheumatoid nodulosis affects males 30–50 years of age with recurrent joint symptoms, hand and foot intraosseous cystic changes, mild or absent systemic symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, positive rheumatoid factor, and a clinically benign course of multiple self-limiting rheumatoid nodules. Classic erosive rheumatoid arthritis can develop.
Accelerated nodulosis
Accelerated nodulosis presents as a rapid onset of multiple small nodules particularly on the hands and feet in treated rheumatoid arthritis patients. It has been reported to affect 8–11% of patients taking methotrexate, and less commonly other treatments including leflunomide, azathioprine, and tumour necrosis factor inhibitors, particularly etanercept. Histology is the same as in rheumatoid nodules.
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Rheumatoid vasculitis is an unusual complication of long-standing severe rheumatoid arthritis, typically involving small to medium sized vessels in any organ of the body. In the skin, rheumatoid vasculitis can present as palpable purpura, nailfold infarcts, digital necrosis, ulcers, and urticarial vasculitis. Biopsy shows a necrotising arteritis.
Bywaters lesions are a specific manifestation of rheumatoid vasculitis presenting as painless purpuric papules less than 1mm in diameter in the fingertip pulp or around the fingernails. They are not associated with systemic vasculitis.
Necrotising vasculitis
Rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatitis
Rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatitis is a rare extra-articular manifestation of severe long-standing seropositive rheumatoid arthritis presenting as a symmetrical asymptomatic eruption of erythematous papules, nodules, and plaques which may show an annular distribution on the extremities. Less commonly, lesions may blister or ulcerate. It is associated with a flare in arthritis activity, and resolves with treatment of the arthritis. Biopsy shows a neutrophilic leukocytoclastic dermatosis without vasculitis.
Neutrophilic dermatosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis Neutrophilic dermatosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis
Cutaneous adverse effects of treatment for rheumatoid arthritis
The treatment of rheumatoid arthritis can cause side effects involving the skin.
Disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD) used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis include methotrexate, azathioprine, leflunamide, ciclosporin, and hydroxychloroquine. Skin side effects are well documented.
There are many new and emerging treatments for rheumatoid arthritis including biological treatments, Janus kinase inhibitors, rituximab (anti-CD20), tocilizumab (anti-interleukin 6) with their associated cutaneous side effects. Tumour necrosis factor inhibitors are biologic agents used widely for treatment-resistant rheumatoid arthritis. Many cutaneous side effects have been reported with their use in rheumatoid arthritis including psoriasis, dermatitis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, lichenoid drug eruptions, and non-infectious cutaneous granulomatous reactions, such as disseminated granuloma annulare, sarcoidosis-like lesions, and interstitial granulomatous dermatitis.
Hand dermatitis Nummular dermatitis Alopecia areata
What is the outcome for rheumatoid arthritis?
Extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis often involve the skin particularly in patients with more severe disease. Some skin signs appear early in the disease course, others only in chronic long-standing rheumatoid arthritis; some are benign and self-limiting, while others may be a sign of serious systemic disease that can affect life-expectancy.
For female patients with rheumatoid arthritis and positive Ro/La autoantibodies, there is a 10% risk of a baby having neonatal lupus erythematosus.
Inadequately treated rheumatoid arthritis can result in disability and impact quality of life.
Abdulqader Y, Al-Ani M, Parperis K. Rheumatoid vasculitis: early presentation of rheumatoid arthritis. BMJ Case Rep. 2016;2016:bcr2016217557. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-217557. PubMed Central
Enginar AÜ, Nur H, Gilgil E, Kaçar C. Accelerated nodulosis in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis. Arch Rheumatol. 2018;34(2):225–8. doi:10.5606/ArchRheumatol.2019.7020. PubMed Central
Lora V, Cerroni L, Cota C. Skin manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2018 Apr;153(2):243–55. doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.18.05872-8. PubMed
Sayah A, English JC 3rd. Rheumatoid arthritis: a review of the cutaneous manifestations. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53(2):191–212. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2004.07.023. PubMed
Schempp CM, Schauer F, Huhn CK, Venhoff N, Finzel S. Skin inflammation associated with arthritis, synovitis and enthesitis. Part 2: rheumatoid arthritis, reactive arthritis, Reiter's syndrome, Lyme borreliosis, dermatomyositis and lupus erythematosus. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2019;17(2):167–81. doi:10.1111/ddg.13761. PubMed
Żuk G, Jaworecka K, Samotij D, Ostańska E, Reich A. Rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatitis. Reumatologia. 2019;57(6):350–3. doi:10.5114/reum.2019.90363. PubMed Central
Connective tissue diseases
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Neonatal lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis — emedicinehealth
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rhinophyma]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rhinophyma]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rhinophyma — extra information
Hypertrophic rosacea of the nose, Phymatous rosacea of the nose
Blood vessel problems
199877001, 724848006
Blood vessel problems
Author: Daniel Wong, Intern, Monash Medical Centre, Victoria, Australia; Chief Editor: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, March 2014.
Rhinophyma is a skin condition affecting the nose in which the skin is thickened and the sebaceous (oil) glands are enlarged. The skin appears skin coloured or red and often has prominent blood vessels, which may be thin and red (telangiectasia) or larger and purplish in hue (venulectasia). The affected skin may be bulbous, pitted due to prominent pores (which may ooze sebum or contain a scaly plug), and scarred.
Typically, rhinophyma affects the tip of the nose, although the sides and skin on the top of the nose can also be involved. Rhinophyma can be cosmetically unsightly as skin thickening may result in irregular nodular growth and deformity of the nose.
Rhinophyma is a type of rosacea. Other forms of rosacea may or may not be present [1]. Occasionally, rhinophyma is preceded by acne.
Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3
What is the cause of rhinophyma?
The cause of rhinophyma is not fully understood. Theories include:
Enlarged blood vessels may predispose to skin thickening [1].
Vascular instability may lead to leakage of fluid into the tissues. This subsequently triggers inflammation and scarring [2].
Other forms of phymatous rosacea
Rhinophyma occurs in a subgroup of rosacea known as phymatous rosacea. Phymatous rosacea can also affect the following sites:
Eyelids (blepharophyma)
Forehead (metophyma).
How is the severity of rhinophyma classified?
Rhinophyma, along with other forms of phymatous rosacea, is graded on a clinical scale of severity from 1 to 3 [1].
Grade 1: prominent follicular openings with no skin thickening
Grade 2: prominent follicular openings with mild skin thickening
Grade 3: prominent follicular openings, skin thickening and overactive sebaceous glands and nodular nasal contour
Who gets rhinophyma?
Rhinophyma predominantly affects male patients. The male-to-female ratio in patients with rhinophyma ranges from 5:1 to 30:1. This is possibly due to androgens (male hormones) [2].
What are the treatment options for rhinophyma?
Non-surgical management
Treatment of rosacea may inhibit the progression of rhinophyma but this has not been conclusively confirmed [2].
Topical metronidazole
Topical azelaic acid
Oral tetracycline antibiotics
The most effective medical treatment appears to be systemic isotretinoin, which can reduce the bulk of rhinophyma [3].
Techniques used to improve the cosmetic appearance of rhinophyma include:
Dermaplaning (excision of thickened skin by shaving off the surface)
Dermabrasion (scraping the surface skin)
Cryotherapy (freezing)
Laser resurfacing (CO2 , Argon, Nd:YAG, Er:YAG)
Are there any complications from rhinophyma?
Basal cell carcinoma is a common form of skin cancer that has been reported to arise in rhinophyma. However, rhinophyma is not considered a precursor for malignancy [1].
Chapter 7: Rosacea and Related Disorders. Bologna Dermatology 3rd Edition.
Rohrich RJ, Griffin MD, Adams WP. Rhinophyma: Review and Update. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. Vol. 110, No. 3. PubMed
Chapter 43.9: Rhinophyma and other phymas. Rook’s Dermatology 8th Edition.
Tanghetti E, Del Rosso JQ, Thiboutot D, Gallo R, Webster G, Eichenfield LF, Stein-Gold L, Berson D, Zaenglein A. Consensus recommendations from the American Acne and Rosacea Society on the management of rosacea, part 4: a status report on physical modalities and devices. Cutis. 2014 Feb;93(2):71–6. PubMed
Rhinophyma – MedlinePlus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Roseola]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/roseola]
Roseola (viral rash): Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Roseola — extra information
Roseola infantum, Exanthem subitum, Sixth disease, Pseudorubella, Three day fever
B08.2, B08.21, B08.22
54385001, 103528003, 402903007, 402902002, 49882001, 85532005
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2002. Updated by Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, September 2015.
Roseola is characterised by high fever lasting for 3–5 days, runny nose, irritability and tiredness. As the fever subsides a rash (exanthem) may appear on the face and body.
Roseola is also known by the names roseola infantum and exanthem subitum.
Roseola is most commonly seen in children between 6 months and three years of age. Most children (86%) will have had roseola by the age of 1 year. Roseola is rarely seen in adults, as infection during childhood probably confers lifelong immunity to the disease. Repeat attacks have been known to occur but are not common.
How is roseola spread?
Roseola is spread from person to person via the saliva of asymptomatic family members. The incubation period for roseola is approximately 9–10 days after exposure.
What are the signs and symptoms of roseola?
High fever (often up to 40 C) for 3–5 days
Upper respiratory symptoms such as a sore throat, cough, runny nose or congestion
Irritability and tiredness
The rash appears around days 3 to 5, as fever subsides
Typically small rose-pink or red raised spots (2–5 mm in diameter) that blanch (turn white) when touched
Some spots may be surrounded by a lighter halo of pale skin
Mainly affects trunk and rarely spreads to involve the neck, face, arms and legs
Similar spots occur on soft palate and uvula (Nagayama spots)
Non-itchy, painless and does not blister
May fade within a few hours or persist for as long as two days
How is roseola diagnosed?
Because roseola is usually mild and self-limiting, diagnosis is usually solely based on the characteristic history and physical examination.
Some laboratories can confirm HHV-6 infection by serology or polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
What is the treatment of roseola?
There is no specific treatment for roseola. The disease is usually mild and self-limiting. Rest, maintaining fluid intake and paracetamol for fever is all that is usually required. No treatment is necessary for the rash, as it does not itch or hurt and fades spontaneously.
What are the complications from roseola?
Complications are rare with roseola in most children. The most common complication is febrile seizures/convulsions that may occur in 5–15% of children. These are triggered by the high fevers of roseola and may be alarming when seen for the first time. Signs of a febrile seizure include:
Loss of consciousness
Jerking or twitching movements in the arms, legs or face for 2 to 3 minutes
Wet or soiled pants in an unconscious, toilet-trained child
These seizures are brief and not dangerous. However, you should have your child examined by a doctor if one happens.
Acute encephalitis, hepatitis, myocarditis, haemophagocytic syndrome and infectious mononucleosis-like illness occur only very rarely.
Reactivation of HHV-6 in immune suppressed patients or in association with drug hypersensitivity syndrome results in fever, rash, pneumonia, hepatitis, bone marrow suppression and encephalitis.
Roseola Infantum in Emergency Medicine — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Rubella]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/rubella]
Rubella (german measles)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Rubella — extra information
German measles, Three day measles
36653000, 5210005, 1857005, 49882001, 5862001
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2002. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, August 2016.
Rubella is a viral disease characterised by rash, swollen glands and fever. The disease is usually mild and of little significance unless you are pregnant. Infection of a pregnant woman (congenital rubella syndrome) commonly results in miscarriage, stillbirth, or birth of an infant with major birth abnormalities.
Rubella is also known as German measles or three-day measles.
What is the cause of rubella?
Rubella is caused by the rubella virus, in the Rubivirus genus.
How common is rubella?
Rubella is now rarely seen in countries where rubella vaccination is part of their routine immunisation programme. In countries that do not have immunisation programmes in place, rubella continues to be a mild childhood illness that may even pass un-noticed. The major burden is congenital rubella syndrome and its devastating effects to the unborn fetus.
How is rubella spread?
What are the signs and symptoms of rubella?
Slight fever, sore throat, runny nose and malaise (may occur prior to appearance of rash, more so in adults than in children).
Tender or swollen glands almost always accompany rubella, most commonly behind the ears (retroauricular) and at the back of the neck (occipital and posterior cervical lymph nodes). Lymphadenopathy may occur in patients with rubella that do not have a rash.
Mucosal involvement results in the Forchheimer sign, in which pinpoint or larger petechiae are noted on the soft palate and uvula during the prodromal period of rubella.
Rash begins on the face that spreads to the neck, trunk and extremities.
Lasts up to 5 days (average is 3 days).
May or may not be itchy.
As rash passes, affected skin may shed in flakes.
Usually not as widespread as in measles.
Other symptoms include pain and swelling in joints (arthralgia and arthritis). This is more common in adults, particularly women, and may persist longer than 2 weeks. The arthritis may become chronic and persist for months or years.
Rubella rash Rubella rash Rubella rash
How is rubella diagnosed?
Because rubella is usually mild and self-limiting, diagnosis in healthy children is based on the characteristic history and physical examination.
Diagnosis of rubella in adults, particularly women of childbearing age, should be confirmed with laboratory testing, as one based on clinical presentation alone is unreliable. The most common test is IgG and IgM serology. Rubella virus can be isolated from throat swabs, blood, urine and spinal fluid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing and molecular typing.
Other tests include CBC, to detect thrombocytopenia and leucopenia, and LFT, to detect viral hepatitis.
What is the treatment of rubella?
There is no specific treatment for rubella. The disease is usually mild and self-limiting. Rest, maintaining fluid intake and possibly taking paracetamol for fever, discomfort or joint pains, are all that is usually required.
What are the complications from rubella?
Complications are rare with rubella in healthy infants and adults. Complications can include:
Arthralgia or arthritis in adults
Thrombocytopenic purpura
Rubella is part of the TORCH complex. Infection in the first trimester of pregnancy comes with a 50% chance of the infant being affected in some way, including miscarriage, fetal death/stillbirth and the congenital rubella syndrome. Features of the congenital rubella syndrome include:
Sensorineural hearing loss
Eye abnormalities (cataract, glaucoma, pigmentary changes)
Congenital heart diseases (patent ductus arteriosus).
intellectual disability
Jaundice (hepatitis)
Thyroid malfunction.
Congenital rubella is one of the causes of the blueberry muffin syndrome, which presents with multiple blue or purple macules, papules and nodules.
How to prevent rubella or congenital rubella syndrome
Rubella and congenital rubella syndrome can be prevented by vaccination with live rubella vaccine. Combined measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine is currently part of routine immunisation programmes in most industrialised countries, including New Zealand.
Rubella vaccine induces long-term (probably life-long) immunity in most individuals. Vaccination schedules recommend a two-dose immunisation strategy, the first dose at 12-15 months, followed by a second dose at 4-6 years.
Women of childbearing age should have their immunity status determined by a blood test before attempting to conceive. Rubella vaccine should be given if they have no antibodies to rubella virus, after which there should be at least a 3-month period before trying to conceive.
Reef SE, Strebel P, Dabbagh A, Gacic-Dobo M, Cochi S. Progress toward control of rubella and prevention of congenital rubella syndrome--worldwide, 2009. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jul;204 Suppl 1:S24-7. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir155. PubMed PMID: 21666168.
Rubella (German measles). CDC (Accessed on August 31, 2011)
Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of mumps: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8). Center for Disease Control
Rubella — Medline Plus
Rubella — Immunisation Handbook 2017, Ministry of Health, NZ
Rubella — Immunisation Advisory Centre, University of Auckland
Rubella — World Health Organization (WHO)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Scalp Folliculitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/scalp-folliculitis]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Scalp folliculitis — extra information
L73.9, L70.2, L66.3, B88.0
EG30.0, ED70.51, ED81.Y, 1B74.0, 1G07.0, 1F2D.1
238378003, 45072005, 77333008, 402922003, 402923008, 23894009, 404175004, 201182003, 238379006, 240894003, 428172002
Author: Reviewed and updated by Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand; Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer; Clare Morrison, Copy Editor, June 2014.
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
What is scalp folliculitis?
Scalp folliculitis is an inflammatory disorder of the hair follicles in the scalp. The condition is also known as "acne necrotica miliaris" or "Proprionibacterium folliculitis".
Scalp folliculitis is characterised by small, very itchy pustules on the scalp, often most troublesome on the frontal hairline. There may be only a small number of lesions, or they may be very numerous. They are hard to leave alone because of the itch. They often become sore and crusted.
Scalp folliculitis Scalp folliculitis Scalp folliculitis
What is the cause of scalp folliculitis?
The cause of scalp folliculitis is not well understood. It is generally considered to be an inflammatory reaction to components of the hair follicle, particularly the micro-organisms. These include:
Yeasts (Malassezia species)
Mites (Demodex folliculorum)
What is the treatment for scalp folliculitis?
The scalp affected by folliculitis should be washed with a mild normal shampoo as often as desired. Antidandruff shampoos containing antifungal agents such as ketoconazole or ciclopirox are sometimes helpful. Conditioner can be used if desired.
The following medications may be helpful for scalp folliculitis:
Topical antibiotics (eg, fusidic acid gel), clindamycin solution, erythromycin solution
Mild topical steroid lotions or creams
Oral antibiotics, particularly long-term tetracycline
Oral isotretinoin – long-term low dose treatment may be required
What is acne necrotica?
Acne necrotica is a more severe form of scalp folliculitis also known as acne varioliformis or acne frontalis. Larger follicular spots (papules) become inflamed then develop blackened crusts, finally leaving permanent pox-like scars. Acne necrotica may affect the face, scalp or other areas.
What is perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens?
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens is also known as dissecting cellulitis/folliculitis, or perifolliculitis capitis.
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens is a rare and severe form of scalp folliculitis sometimes associated with acne conglobata, hidradenitis suppurativa and spinal arthritis (spondyloarthropathy). It most often affects black adult men but may rarely occur in white-skinned individuals, females, and children.
Large nodules and cysts accompany smaller follicular papules and pustules, from which purulent material can be expressed. Temporary hair loss over the lesions eventually results in permanent scarring and bald patches.
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens is very resistant to treatment. The severity may be reduced with oral isotretinoin, antibiotics, dapsone and injected or systemic steroids. Compression of fluctuant nodules has also been reported to be of benefit.
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens Dissecting cellulitis
Follicular occlusion syndrome
Folliculitis keloidalis
Folliculitis decalvans
Diagnosis of scalp rashes
Melanoma in skin of colour
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Perifolliculitis Capitis Abscedens Et Suffodiens — Medscape Reference
Dissecting cellulitis of the scalp — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Scalp Psoriasis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/scalp-psoriasis]
Scalp Psoriasis: A Complete Overview — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Scalp psoriasis — extra information
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
L40.9, L40.0, L21.0, L65.9
EA90.50, EA90.5Y, EG30.2, ED70.Y
238608008, 402319008, 25847004, 238924007
Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
Authors: Dr Ebtisam Elghblawi, Specialist Dermatologist, Tripoli, Libya (2022); Dr Amy Stanway, Dermatologist, New Zealand (2004).Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is scalp psoriasis?
Scalp psoriasis is a skin condition characterised by red, thickened, well-demarcated patches or plaques with overlying silvery-white scales, affecting part or all of the scalp.
It can be contained within the hairline, though frequently affects the back of the head, or extends onto the forehead (facial psoriasis), ears, or neck. While often camouflaged by the hair, scalp psoriasis can be a source of embarrassment and distress due to itching and dandruff-like flaking. It may occur in isolation, or with any other form of psoriasis, and is typically a chronic, relapsing-remitting condition.
Scalp psoriasis extending beyond the anterior hairline Confluent psoriasis in the scalp extending anteriorly from the hairline Marked thick scaling in psoriasis of the scalp Extensive scaling over the parietal scalp due to psoriasis. There is psoriasis also in the ears and around the hair line Marked scaling in psoriasis of the scalp Severe scalp psoriasis with areas of pityriasis amianticea
Who gets scalp psoriasis?
Psoriasis is estimated to affect 2% of the population worldwide and can occur at any age. Among those affected by psoriasis, approximately 80% experience scalp involvement.
What causes scalp psoriasis?
In psoriasis, skin cells tend to form quickly (hyperproliferation), within days rather than weeks, due to faulty immune system signals. As a result, excess cells pile up on the skin surface, causing patches and plaques.
Psoriasis, including scalp psoriasis, is thought to be caused and affected by a combination of genetic, immune, hormonal, and environmental factors, such as:
Bacterial infections, such as streptococcal sore throats
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Hormonal changes (psoriasis often intensifies around puberty, the postpartum period, and menopause; and often improves during pregnancy)
Sunlight/ultraviolet radiation — usually helps but occasionally exacerbates psoriasis
Use of harsh chemical products or soaps
Trauma or injury to the skin (Koebner phenomenon)
Medication — this may induce or exacerbate psoriasis.
What are the clinical features of scalp psoriasis?
Scalp psoriasis is characterised by well-defined, red, thickened patches or plaques on the scalp with overlying silvery-white scales.
Scales can flake off causing ‘dandruff’.
It can be localised to parts of the scalp and often affects the back of the head, or can involve the entire scalp.
It can be very itchy
Scaling may build up and produce an appearance similar to overlapping Mediterranean roof tiles (Pityriasis amiantacea)
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
According to Gelfand et al (2005), the prevalence of all psoriasis was 1.3% in black patients compared to 2.5% in white patients, which is probably linked to genetics.
However, the diagnosis of psoriasis may also be delayed or missed in darker skin phototypes where the presentation of psoriasis may vary from purple to dark brown patches with grey or silver scales.
When managing scalp psoriasis in patients with different skin and hair types, it is important to formulate a topical treatment regimen that is compatible with each patient’s hair care practices and cultural preferences. For example, hair texture that requires a reduced frequency of hair washing thereby renders daily medicated shampoos unsuitable. Once weekly washing in conjunction with daily application of a topical corticosteroid in a vehicle compatible with preferred hair styling practices may be more acceptable.
What are the complications of scalp psoriasis?
Sleep disturbance secondary to itching.
Skin infections due to scratching and impaired skin barrier.
Anxiety and reduced self-esteem due to scalp appearance and dandruff-like flaking.
Reversible hair loss (alopecia).
Rarely, scarring alopecia can develop due to chronic, relapsing scalp psoriasis.
Scalp psoriasis may be associated with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
How is scalp psoriasis diagnosed?
Additionally, assessing psoriasis severity — for example, using the Psoriasis Scalp Severity Index (PSSI) — and its impact on quality-of-life is important.
What is the differential diagnosis for scalp psoriasis?
Seborrhoeic dermatitis — can co-exist with scalp psoriasis (called sebopsoriasis).
Fungal scalp infection (tinea capitis).
Pityriasis amiantacea
Pityriasis rubra pilaris.
What is the treatment for scalp psoriasis?
Scalp psoriasis can be difficult to treat due to the delivery of therapy in and around the hair, which complicates the application of many topical products. Cosmetic considerations also affect treatment adherence.
Usually, lotions, solutions, or gels are more suitable for the scalp than heavier products such as ointments. In recent years, a number of new formulations have been developed (eg, foams, shampoos, and sprays) that enhance cosmetic acceptability and adherence. Most treatments will need to be used regularly for several weeks before a benefit is seen, and may have to be applied regularly to keep the scalp clear.
See Treatment of psoriasis for more information.
Regular use of emollients and moisturisers such as scalp oils.
Avoiding known triggers where possible.
Modifiable lifestyle factors such as maintaining a healthy weight, limiting alcohol intake, and smoking cessation.
Avoiding picking or scratching the scalp, which can cause further damage.
Some people find cutting their hair short helps control scalp psoriasis, likely as it makes treatments easier to apply.
Topical corticosteroid is recommended for short-term treatment (eg, clobetasol propionate 0.05% shampoo, steroid foams, water-based gels, scalp applications); there is limited data on long-term monotherapy for the scalp.
Topical Vitamin D analogues eg, calcipotriol — unlike steroids, these do not cause skin atrophy; however, they are found to be less effective than corticosteroids for scalp psoriasis (also not recommended for use on the face).
Combined corticosteroid and Vitamin D therapies eg, calcipotriol 0.005% and betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% has been found to be superior to its individual ingredients, with a fast onset of action and no reports of skin atrophy, striae, purpura, or significant effects on serum calcium.
Keratolytic (anti-scaling) agents, eg, salicylic acid, urea, or a dimethicone-based topical keratolytic spray (eg, Loyon®)
Salicylic acid shampoos can enhance the penetration of other topical treatments including corticosteroids, and have been recommended by the US National Psoriasis Foundation.
Coal tar shampoos (2–10%) — coal tar can be very effective for body psoriasis although less evidence for use in scalp psoriasis, and less cosmetically acceptable as can stain the scalp and hair.
Coconut oil compound ointment (eg, Coco-Scalp®) — a combination of coal tar, salicylic acid, and sulphur that can be left on for at least an hour (or even overnight) before being shampooed off. Compliance can be aided by watching an instructional video on its application and use (see Treating scalp psoriasis linked below).
Ketoconazole, ciclopirox, zinc pyrithione, and other antifungal shampoos — effective for dandruff and seborrhoeic dermatitis; varying effect on sebopsoriasis and psoriasis.
Less commonly used topical therapies
Intralesional corticosteroids — have been applied in practice and remain a second-line treatment option, although specific studies evaluating this treatment regimen for scalp psoriasis are lacking.
Targeted phototherapy with a laser or non-laser light source can help improve symptoms.
Can be challenging to target the scalp in the presence of hair.
Direct treatment may be helped by a handheld ultraviolet B (UVB) comb device.
Immunosuppressants such as methotrexate and ciclosporin.
Vitamin A derivative acitretin.
Phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) inhibitor apremilast.
Biologic agents such as anti-TNF, IL-17 and IL-12,-23 inhibitors (eg, etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab, brodalumab, secukinumab, ixekizumab, ustekinumab, guselkumab, risankizumab, and others.
Support groups can also be helpful for those living with psoriasis.
How do you prevent scalp psoriasis?
Scalp psoriasis tends to be a chronic problem. However, regular scalp care, maintenance treatment, lifestyle factors, and avoiding triggers or exacerbating factors can help prevent or reduce the severity of flares.
What is the outcome of scalp psoriasis?
While scalp psoriasis is generally a chronic, relapsing-remitting condition, there are many available treatment options. The mainstay of treatment is topical therapy, although this can be challenging for scalp conditions given their location and the presence of hair.
Newer topical formulations, such as foams and sprays, can help to improve treatment tolerability and outcomes. In patients with moderate-to-severe disease who do not respond to topical treatments, there are a number of systemic therapies including immunomodulatory agents and biological treatments.
Alexis AF, Blackcloud P. Psoriasis in skin of color: Epidemiology, genetics, clinical presentation, and treatment nuances. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7(11):16–24. PubMed Central
Blakely K, Gooderham M. Management of scalp psoriasis: current perspectives. Psoriasis (Auckl). 2016;6:33–40. doi 10.2147/PTT.S85330 Journal
Gelfand JM, Stern RS, et al. The prevalence of psoriasis in African Americans: results from a population-based study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005 Jan;52(1):23–6. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2004.07.045. Journal
Mosca M, Hong J, et al. Scalp Psoriasis: A Literature Review of Effective Therapies and Updated Recommendations for Practical Management. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2021 Jun;11(3):769–97. doi 10.1007/s13555-021-00521-z. Journal
Trichoscopy of inflammatory conditions
Treatment of psoriasis
Emollients and moisturisers
Biological treatments
Navigating Psoriasis — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Scalp psoriasis — American Academy of Dermatology
Treating scalp psoriasis — Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust [YouTube]
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Scorad]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/scorad]
SCORAD (scoring atopic dermatitis)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
SCORAD — extra information
Scoring atopic dermatitis
Eczemas, Diagnosis and testing
Diagnosis and testing
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2009.
SCORAD is a clinical tool used to assess the extent and severity of eczema (SCORing Atopic Dermatitis). Dermatologists may use this tool before and after treatment to determine whether the treatment has been effective.
To determine extent, the sites affected by eczema are shaded on a drawing of a body. The rule of 9 is used to calculate the affected area (A) as a percentage of the whole body.
Lower limbs 18% each
The score for each area is added up. The total area is 'A', which has a possible maximum of 100%.
A representative area of eczema is selected. In this area, the intensity of each of the following signs is assessed as none (0), mild (1), moderate (2) or severe (3).
Skin thickening (lichenification)
Dryness (this is assessed in an area where there is no inflammation)
The intensity scores are added together to give 'B' (maximum 18).
Subjective symptoms (itch and sleeplessness), are each scored by the patient or relative using a visual analogue scale where 0 is no itch (or no sleeplessness) and 10 is the worst imaginable itch (or sleeplessness). These scores are added to give 'C' (maximum 20).
The SCORAD for that individual is A/5 + 7B/2 + C
SCORAD – Université de Nantes AD Information Server
Severity scoring of atopic dermatitis: the SCORAD index. Consensus Report of the European Task Force on Atopic Dermatitis. Dermatology. 1993;186(1):23-31. doi: 10.1159/000247298. PubMed
Eczema Area and Severity Index
What causes atopic dermatitis
Treatment of atopic dermatitis
Complications of atopic dermatitis
Dermatitis online course for health professionals
SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD) Calculator — Matteo Corti
SCORAD Calculator — DermaTools
SCORAD – Fondation dermatite atopique
POEM — Patient Oriented Eczema Measure
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Seborrhoeic Keratosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/seborrhoeic-keratosis]
Seborrhoeic keratoses (brown warts, basal cell papillomas, seborrheic keratosis)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Seborrhoeic keratosis — extra information
Basal cell papilloma, Senile wart, Senile hyperkeratosis, Keratosis senilis
L82, L82.0, L57.0, L81.4, L82.1
2F21.0, EJ20.1, 2F21.Y, EL10
398838000, 403862005, 442348004, 446352002, 394727000, 403867004, 403865007, 403868009, 403864006, 403866008, 102606000, 254669003, 403869001, 403870000, 394728005, 733894009, 403198004, 72100002
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Last Reviewed: January, 2016
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated, January 2016.
What is a seborrhoeic keratosis?
Seborrhoeic keratosis is a harmless warty spot that appears during adult life as a common sign of skin ageing. Some people have hundreds of them.
Seborrhoeic keratosis (American spelling - seborrheic keratosis) is also called SK, basal cell papilloma, senile wart, brown wart, wisdom wart, or barnacle. The descriptive term, benign keratosis, is a broader term that is used to include the following related scaly skin lesions:
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Solar lentigo (which can be difficult to distinguish from a flat seborrhoeic keratosis)
Lichen planus-like keratosis (which arises from a seborrhoeic keratosis or a solar lentigo).
Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Pigmented seborrhoeic keratosis
Who gets seborrhoeic keratoses?
Seborrhoeic keratoses are extremely common. It has been estimated that over 90% of adults over the age of 60 years have one or more of them. They occur in males and females of all races, typically beginning to erupt in the 30s or 40s. They are uncommon under the age of 20 years.
What causes seborrhoeic keratoses?
The precise cause of seborrhoeic keratoses is not known.
The name is misleading, because they are not limited to a seborrhoeic distribution (scalp, mid-face, chest, upper back) as in seborrhoeic dermatitis, nor are they formed from sebaceous glands, as is the case with sebaceous hyperplasia, nor are they associated with sebum — which is greasy.
Seborrhoeic keratoses are considered degenerative in nature. As time goes by, seborrhoeic keratoses become more numerous. Some people inherit a tendency to develop a very large number of them. Researchers have noted:
Eruptive seborrhoeic keratoses can follow sunburn or dermatitis.
Skin friction may be the reason they appear in body folds.
Viral cause (eg human papillomavirus) seems unlikely.
Stable and clonal mutations or activation of FRFR3, PIK3CA, RAS, AKT1 and EGFR genes are found in seborrhoeic keratoses.
Seborrhoeic keratosis can arise from solar lentigo.
FRFR3 mutations also arise in solar lentigines. These mutations are associated with increased age and location on the head and neck, suggesting a role of ultraviolet radiation in these lesions.
Seborrhoeic keratoses do not harbour tumour suppressor gene mutations.
Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors (used to treat cancer) often result in an increase in verrucal (warty) keratoses.
What are the clinical features of seborrhoeic keratoses?
Seborrhoeic keratoses can arise on any area of skin, covered or uncovered, with the exception of palms and soles. They do not arise from mucous membranes.
Seborrhoeic keratoses have a highly variable appearance.
Flat or raised papule or plaque
1 mm to several cm in diameter
Skin coloured, yellow, grey, light brown, dark brown, black or mixed colours
Smooth, waxy or warty surface
Solitary or grouped in certain areas, such as within the scalp, under the breasts, over the spine or in the groin
They appear to stick on to the skin surface like barnacles.
Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis
Variants of seborrhoeic keratoses
Variants of seborrhoeic keratoses include:
Solar lentigo: flat circumscribed pigmented patches in sun-exposed sites
Dermatosis papulosa nigra: small, pedunculated and heavily pigmented seborrhoeic keratoses on head and neck of darker-skinned individuals
Stucco keratoses: grey, white or yellow papules on the lower extremities
Inverted follicular keratosis
Large cell acanthoma
Lichenoid keratosis: an inflammatory phase preceding involution of some seborrhoeic keratoses and solar lentigines.
Florid lesions of stucco keratoses on the ankle Dermatosis papulosa nigra Irritated seborrhoeic keratosis
Complications of seborrhoeic keratoses
Seborrhoeic keratoses are not premalignant tumours. However:
Skin cancers are sometimes difficult to tell apart from seborrhoeic keratoses.
Skin cancer may by chance arise within or collide with a seborrhoeic keratosis.
Very rarely, eruptive seborrhoeic keratoses may denote an underlying internal malignancy, most often gastric adenocarcinoma. The paraneoplastic syndrome is known as the sign of Leser-Trélat. Eruptive seborrhoeic keratoses that are not associated with cancer are sometimes described as having pseudo-sign of Leser-Trélat.
Eruptive and irritated seborrhoeic keratoses may also arise as an adverse reaction to a medication, such as adalimumab, vemurafenib, dabrafenib, 5-fluorouracil and many chemotherapy drugs.
An irritated seborrhoeic keratosis is an inflamed, red and crusted lesion. It may give rise to eczematous dermatitis around the seborrhoeic keratosis. Dermatitis may also trigger new seborrhoeic keratoses to appear.
How is a seborrhoeic keratosis diagnosed?
The diagnosis of seborrhoeic keratosis is often easy.
A stuck-on, well-demarcated warty plaque
Other similar lesions
Sometimes, seborrhoeic keratosis may resemble skin cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma or melanoma.
Dermoscopy often shows a disordered structure in a seborrhoeic keratosis, as is also true for skin cancer. There are diagnostic dermatoscopic clues to seborrhoeic keratosis, such as multiple orange or brown clods (due to keratin in skin surface crevices), white milia-like clods, and curved thick ridges and furrows forming a brain-like or cerebriform pattern.
If doubt remains, a seborrhoeic keratosis may undergo partial shave or punch biopsy or diagnostic excision. [see Seborrhoeic keratosis pathology]
The dominant histopathological features of seborrhoeic keratosis may be described as:
Melanoacanthoma (deeply pigmented)
Hyperkeratotic or papillomatous
Adenoid or reticulated
Adamantinoid or mucinous
What is the treatment for seborrhoeic keratoses?
An individual seborrhoeic keratosis can easily be removed if desired. Reasons for removal may be that it is unsightly, itchy, or catches on clothing.
Methods used to remove seborrhoeic keratoses include:
Cryotherapy (liquid nitrogen) for thinner lesions (repeated if necessary)
Curettage and/or electrocautery
Ablative laser surgery
Shave biopsy (shaving off with a scalpel)
Focal chemical peel with trichloracetic acid
All methods have disadvantages. Treatment-induced loss of pigmentation is a particular issue for dark-skinned patients. There is no easy way to remove multiple lesions on a single occasion.
How can seborrhoeic keratoses be prevented?
How to prevent seborrhoeic keratoses is unknown.
What is the outlook for seborrhoeic keratoses?
Seborrhoeic keratoses tend to persist. From time to time, individual or multiple lesions may remit spontaneously or via the lichenoid keratosis mechanism.
Those associated with dermatitis may regress after it has been controlled.
Jackson JM, Alexis A, Berman B, Berson DS, Taylor S, Weiss JS. Current Understanding of Seborrheic Keratosis: Prevalence, Etiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, and Management. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015 Oct 1;14(10):1119–25. PubMed
Hafner C, Hartmann A, van Oers JM, Stoehr R, Zwarthoff EC, Hofstaedter F, Landthaler M, Vogt T. FGFR3 mutations in seborrheic keratoses are already present in flat lesions and associated with age and localization. Mod Pathol. 2007 Aug;20(8):895–903. Epub 2007 Jun 22. PubMed
Hafner C, Hafner H, Groesser L. [Genetic basis of seborrheic keratosis and epidermal nevi]. Pathologe. 2014 Sep;35(5):413–23. doi: 10.1007/s00292-014-1928-9. Review. German. PubMed
Hida Y, Kubo Y, Arase S. Activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 and oncogene-induced senescence in skin tumours. Br J Dermatol. 2009 Jun;160(6):1258–63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09068.x. Epub 2009 Mar 9. PubMed
Husain Z, Ho JK, Hantash BM. Sign and pseudo-sign of Leser-Trélat: case reports and a review of the literature. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013 May;12(5):e79–87. Review. PubMed
Brown marks and freckles
Benign keratinocytic and adnexal tumours – common skin lesions course
Common benign skin lesions
Stucco Keratosis — Medscape Reference
Seborrheic Keratosis — Medscape Reference
Seborrhoeic Warts — British Association of Dermatologists
Patient information: Seborrheic keratosis (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Seborrheic Keratosis — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Seborrhoeic Keratosis Images]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/seborrhoeic-keratosis-images]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
> Go to the image library
Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis Seborrhoeic keratosis
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Skin Phototype]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/skin-phototype]
Skin phototype (Fitzpatrick skin type)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Fitzpatrick skin phototype
Fitzpatrick skin phototype — extra information
Diagnosis and testing, Terminology
443635002, 443708004
Diagnosis and testing
Fitzpatrick skin phototype
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2012.
What is the Fitzpatrick skin phototype?
The Fitzpatrick skin type (or phototype) describes a way to classify the skin by its reaction to exposure to sunlight.
What is the Fitzpatrick skin phototype based on?
The Fitzpatrick skin type (or phototype) depends on the amount of melanin pigment in the skin. This is determined by constitutional colour (white, brown, or black skin) and the effect of exposure to ultraviolet radiation (tanning). Pale or white skin burns easily and tans slowly and poorly: it needs more protection against sun exposure. Darker skin burns less and tans more easily. It is also more prone to develop postinflammatory pigmentation after injury (brown marks).
Fitzpatrick skin phototype is a constitutional characteristic present at birth. Note that people with photosensitivity may burn easily on exposure to the sun due to a disease, condition, or medication; however, their tanning ability is not influenced by their photosensitivity.
The Fitzpatrick classification
The Fitzpatrick classification of skin phototype is shown in the table below.
Fitzpatrick skin type
Pale white skin, blue/green eyes, blond/red hair
Always burns, does not tan
Fair skin, blue eyes
Burns easily, tans poorly
Tans after initial burn
Burns minimally, tans easily
Rarely burns, tans darkly easily
Dark brown or black skin
Never burns, always tans darkly
Phototype I Phototype II Phototype III Phototype IV Phototype V Phototype VI
Skin and hair colour
Melanoma in skin of colour
Ultraviolet radiation
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Solar Lentigo]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/solar-lentigo]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Solar lentigo — extra information
Last Reviewed: November, 2025
Author: Dr Aoife Fitzpatrick; Dr Jonathan Chan, Consultant Dermatologist, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Australia (2024)Peer reviewed by: Dr Brenda Ngo, Mater Hospital, Brisbane, Australia (2025)Previous contributor: Dr Bob Chan, Dermatology Registrar, Auckland, New Zealand (2014)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian CoulsonEdited by the DermNet content department.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is solar lentigo?
Solar lentigo is a common, benign, flat, pigmented lesion found predominantly on sun-exposed skin. It develops as a result of chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) from the sun or artificial sources eg, phototherapy, sunbeds.
Solar lentigines are also commonly referred to as:
Who gets solar lentigo?
Solar lentigo is associated with the following:
Most frequently seen in middle-aged and older adults, reflecting cumulative photodamage.
Lighter skin colour (Fitzpatrick skin phototype I or II)
May be found in up to 90% of Caucasians over the age of 60.
Also common in the Asian population, where they tend to present on the face.
Can appear on sun-damaged skin after an acute sunburn
Use of sunbeds and certain forms of phototherapy (eg, psoralen and ultraviolet A).
What causes solar lentigo?
Solar lentigines occur due to chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation.
While the exact pathogenesis is not fully understood, UVR is thought to cause mutations that enhance melanogenesis (melanin production) and melanin retention within keratinocytes. While melanocytic activity is increased, a key feature of solar lentigo is that the number of melanocytes within the basal cell layer is normal or only slightly increased.
Several gene mutations have been observed in both solar lentigo and seborrhoeic keratosis, suggesting a common genetic basis. These mutations include MC1R, SLC45A2, FGFR3, PIK3CA, IRF4, RALY/ASIP, and BNC2.
Solar lentigines can also occur as part of genetic syndromes such as Noonan syndrome or Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
What are the clinical features of solar lentigo?
Most commonly located on sun-exposed areas eg, dorsum of hands, forearms, upper body, and shins
Well-demarcated flat or slightly raised lesions
Irregular, round, or oval in shape
Colour ranges from yellow, tan, dark brown, or black, but individual lesions are typically uniform in colour
Size varies from several millimetres to centimetres
Lesions can be individual (discrete) or they may merge (coalescent)
Surface can be rough/scaly to palpate due to epidermal thickening
Surrounding skin may display other signs of photodamage eg, senile purpura, idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
Solar lentigines are asymptomatic and do not cause itching or pain. Unlike ephelides (freckles), which disappear or substantially fade during winter, solar lentigo persists year-round, though it may slightly darken in summer.
A solar lentigo on the nose — it is regularly pigmented and macular, with a regular border A solar lentigo on the cheek Multiple solar lentigines on a sun-damaged back Multiple solar lentigines on the back of the hand Dermoscopy of a solar lentigo Dermoscopy of a solar lentigo
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Solar lentigo may be more difficult to appreciate in darker skin types.
What are the complications of solar lentigo?
Missed diagnosis of skin cancer (eg, melanoma in situ) due to a similar appearance
Increased skin cancer risk
Solar lentigines reflect UVR exposure and thus are associated with an increased risk of skin cancer.
Solar lentigines are an independent risk factor for melanoma.
Evolution into seborrhoeic keratosis or lichenoid keratosis
How is solar lentigo diagnosed?
Solar lentigines are typically diagnosed clinically, aided by dermoscopy.
Dermoscopy features include:
Faint pigment network
Fingerprint-like structures
Well-demarcated and/or moth-eaten borders.
Solar lentigines with unusual features that make it difficult to differentiate from a melanoma in situ are classified as atypical solar lentigines.
A skin biopsy should be performed where there is diagnostic uncertainty or concern for malignancy. If the lesion is variegated in colour, biopsies should be performed from each distinct area. The rationale is that different pathologies (eg, lentigo maligna, pigmented actinic keratosis) can co-exist within the same spot — these are called collision lesions.
Typical histopathological features of solar lentigo include:
Hyperpigmentation of the basal cell layer
Keratinocyte proliferation
Elongation and thinning of rete ridges
See: lentigo pathology.
What is the differential diagnosis for solar lentigo?
Atypical solar lentigo
Lentigo simplex or other forms of lentigo
Macular seborrhoeic keratosis
Pigmented actinic keratosis
Pigmented Bowen disease
Ephelides (freckles)
Small café-au lait-macules
Junctional melanocytic naevus
Clear cell acanthoma
What is the treatment for solar lentigo?
Solar lentigines are benign lesions that do not require treatment, unless for cosmetic reasons.
Rigorous sun protection:
Reduces the risk of developing further solar lentigines
May modestly lighten existing lesions.
Regular skin checks eg, mole mapping.
Pigment-specific laser therapy eg, neodymium YAG laser
Intense pulsed light therapy
Bleaching creams eg, hydroquinone, cysteamine cream, mequinol
Combination-based therapy (using two or more modalities together) delivers the highest rates of resolution, followed by laser therapy, topical retinoids, cryotherapy, and peels. Destructive modalities (eg, cryotherapy, laser therapy) carry the risk of leaving behind pale or dark spots, which can be temporary or permanent.
Strict sun protection is required to prevent recurrence after treatment.
How do you prevent solar lentigo?
Solar lentigines can be prevented by exercising strict sun protection.
What is the outcome for solar lentigo?
If left untreated, solar lentigines will likely persist but remain benign. Solar lentigo can slowly enlarge or darken with time, remain stable, or occasionally undergo spontaneous regression through a lichenoid reaction pattern.
Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L. Dermatology. Elsevier; 2024.
Byrom L, Barksdale S, Weedon D, et al. Unstable solar lentigo: A defined separate entity. The Australasian Journal of Dermatology. 2016;57(3):229-234. doi:10.1111/ajd.12447. Journal
Griffiths C, Barker J, Bleiker TO, et al. Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology. John Wiley & Sons; 2024.
Hara Y, Shibata T. Characteristics of dermal vascularity in melasma and solar lentigo. Photodermatology, Photoimmunology & Photomedicine. 2024;40(2):e12953. doi:10.1111/phpp.12953. Journal
Hordinsky MK, Soutor C. Clinical Dermatology : Diagnosis and Management of Common Disorders. McGraw-Hill; 2022.
Mukovozov I, Roesler J, Kashetsky N, et al. Treatment of Lentigines: A Systematic Review. Dermatologic Surgery. 2023; 49 (1): 17-24. doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000003630. PubMed
Praetorius C, Sturm RA, Steingrimsson E. Sun-induced freckling: ephelides and solar lentigines. Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research. 2014;27(3):339-350. doi:10.1111/pcmr.12232. Journal
Common benign skin lesions | Brown spots and freckles | Ephelis (freckle) | Lentigo |  Lentigo pathology | Lentigo simplex
Melanoma | Melanoma in situ
Sun protection | Sunscreens
Ultraviolet radiation | Photochemotherapy (PUVA) | Sunbeds
Age spots (liver spots) — Mayo Clinic
Age spots (solar lentigo. Liver spots) — Harvard Health
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Stevens Johnson Syndrome Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/stevens-johnson-syndrome-toxic-epidermal-necrolysis]
Stevens Johnson Syndrome / Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. SJS/TEN
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Stevens–Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
Stevens–Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis — extra information
Lyell syndrome, Erythema multiforme exudativum, Ectodermosis erosiva pluriorificialis, Stevens Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
EB13.0, EB13.1, EB13.2, EB12, EH63, EH63.0, EH 63.1, EH63.2
73442001, 768962006, 124911000119100, 768946000, 403609001, 724833000, 402744003, 441837004
Stevens–Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer; Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2003. Updated by Dr Delwyn Dyall-Smith, 2009. Further updated by Dr Amanda Oakley, January 2016.
Differential diagnoses
What are Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis?
Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are now believed to be variants of the same condition, distinct from erythema multiforme. SJS/TEN is a rare, acute, serious, and potentially fatal skin reaction in which there are sheet-like skin and mucosal loss. Using current definitions, it is nearly always caused by medications.
SJS/TEN is a very rare complication of medication use (estimated at 1–2/million each year for SJS, and 0.4–1.2/million each year for TEN).
Anyone on medication can develop SJS/TEN unpredictably.
It can affect all age groups and all races.
It is slightly more common in females than in males.
It is 100 times more common in association with human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV).
Genetic factors are important.
There are HLA associations in some races to anticonvulsants and allopurinol.
Polymorphisms to specific genes have been detected (eg, CYP2C coding for cytochrome P450 in patients reacting to anticonvulsants).
More than 200 medications have been reported in association with SJS/TEN.
It is more often seen with drugs with long half-lives compared to even a chemically similar related drug with a short half-life. A half-life of a medication is the time that half of the delivered dose remains circulating in the body.
The medications are usually systemic (taken by mouth or injection), but TEN has been reported after topical use.
SJS/TEN has rarely been associated with vaccination and infections such as mycoplasma and cytomegalovirus. Infections are generally associated with mucosal involvement and less severe cutaneous disease than when drugs are the cause.
The drugs that most commonly cause SJS/TEN are antibiotics in 40%. Other drugs include:
Sulfonamides: cotrimoxazole
Beta-lactam: penicillins, cephalosporins
Anti-convulsants: lamotrigine, carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbitone
Paracetamol/acetaminophen
Nevirapine (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (oxicam type mainly)
The anticancer drugs, PD-1 inhibitors.
Other triggers of SJS/TEN.
What causes SJS/TEN?
SJS/TEN is a rare and unpredictable reaction to a medication. The mechanism has still not been understood and is complex.
There are probably two major pathways involved:
Fas-Fas ligand pathway of apoptosis has been considered a pivotal step in the pathogenesis of TEN. The Fas ligand (FasL), a form of tumour necrosis factor, is secreted by blood lymphocytes and can bind to the Fas ‘death’ receptor expressed by keratinocytes.
Granule-mediated exocytosis via perforin and granzyme B resulting in cytotoxicity (cell death). Perforin and granzyme B can be detected in early blister fluid, and it has been suggested that levels may be associated with disease severity.
What are the clinical features of SJS/TEN?
SJS/TEN usually develops within the first week of antibiotic therapy but up to 2 months after starting an anticonvulsant. For most drugs, the onset is within a few days up to 1 month.
Before the rash appears, there is usually a prodromal illness of several days duration resembling an upper respiratory tract infection or 'flu-like illness. Symptoms may include:
Sore throat, difficulty swallowing
Runny nose and cough
Sore red eyes, conjunctivitis
General aches and pains.
There is then an abrupt onset of a tender/painful red skin rash starting on the trunk and extending rapidly over hours to days onto the face and limbs (but rarely affecting the scalp, palms or soles). The maximum extent is usually reached by four days.
The skin lesions may be:
Macules — flat, red and diffuse (measles-like spots) or purple (purpuric) spots
Targetoid — as in erythema multiforme
Blisters — flaccid (ie, not tense).
The blisters then merge to form sheets of skin detachment, exposing red, oozing dermis. The Nikolsky sign is positive in areas of skin redness. This means that blisters and erosions appear when the skin is rubbed gently.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis Toxic epidermal necrolysis Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Mucosal involvement is prominent and severe, although not forming actual blisters. At least two mucosal surfaces are affected including:
Eyes (conjunctivitis, less often corneal ulceration, anterior uveitis, panophthalmitis) — red, sore, sticky, photosensitive eyes
Lips/mouth (cheilitis, stomatitis) — red crusted lips, painful mouth ulcers
Pharynx, oesophagus — causing difficulty eating
Genital area and urinary tract — erosions, ulcers, urinary retention
Upper respiratory tract (trachea and bronchi) — cough and respiratory distress
Gastrointestinal tract — diarrhoea.
The patient is very ill, extremely anxious and in considerable pain. In addition to skin/mucosal involvement, other organs may be affected including liver, kidneys, lungs, bone marrow and joints.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis Stevens Johnson Syndrome Stevens Johnson Syndrome
What are the complications of SJS/TEN?
SJS/TEN can be fatal due to complications in the acute phase. The mortality rate is up to 10% for SJS and at least 30% for TEN.
During the acute phase, potentially fatal complications include:
Dehydration and acute malnutrition
Infection of skin, mucous membranes, lungs (pneumonia), septicaemia (blood poisoning) with bacteria and Candida
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Gastrointestinal ulceration, perforation and intussusception
Shock and multiple organ failure including kidney failure
Thromboembolism and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.
How is SJS/TEN diagnosed?
SJS/TEN is suspected clinically and classified based on the skin surface area detached at maximum extent.
Skin detachment < 10% of body surface area (BSA)
Widespread erythematous or purpuric macules or ﬂat atypical targets
Detachment between 10% and 30% of BSA
Widespread purpuric macules or ﬂat atypical targets
Detachment > 30% of BSA
Widespread purpuric macules or ﬂat atypical targets
Detachment of > 10% of BSA
Large epidermal sheets and no purpuric macules
The category cannot always be defined with certainty on initial presentation. The diagnosis may, therefore, change during the first few days in the hospital.
Investigations in SJS/TEN
If the test is available, elevated levels of serum granulysin taken in the first few days of a drug eruption may be predictive of SJS/TEN.
Skin biopsy is usually required to confirm the clinical diagnosis and to exclude staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) and other generalised rashes with blisters
The histopathology shows keratinocyte necrosis (death of individual skin cells), full thickness epidermal/epithelial necrosis (death of an entire layer of skin), minimal inflammation (very mild lymphocytic infiltrate of the superficial dermis). The direct immunofluorescence test on the skin biopsy is negative, indicating the disease is not due to deposition of antibodies in the skin.
Blood tests do not help to make the diagnosis but are essential to make sure fluid and vital nutrients have been replaced, to identify complications and to assess prognostic factors (see below). Abnormalities may include:
Leucopenia (reduced white cells), especially lymphopenia (reduced lymphocytes) is very common (90%).
Neutropenia (reduced neutrophils), if present, is a bad prognostic sign.
Eosinophilia (raised eosinophil count) and atypical lymphocytosis (odd-looking lymphocytes) do not occur.
Mildly raised liver enzymes are common (30%), and approximately 10% develop overt hepatitis.
In vitro diagnostic tests for drug allergies including SJS/TEN are under investigation.
Patch testing rarely identifies the culprit in SJS/TEN, and is not recommended.
Presence of malignancy (cancer)
Initial percentage of epidermal detachment > 10%
Serum urea level > 10 mmol/L
Serum glucose level > 14 mmol/L
Serum bicarbonate level < 20 mmol/L.
The risk of dying from SJS/TEN depends on the score.
SCORTEN 5 or more > 90%
In 2019, a new prediction model was proposed, the ABCD-10.
A: age over 50 years (one point)
B: bicarbonate level < 20 mmol/L (one point)
C: cancer present and active (two points)
D: dialysis prior to admission (3 points)
10: epidermal detachment ≥ 10% body surface area on admission (one point)
The ABCD-10 was evaluated in a cohort of 370 patients >with SJS/TEN in multiple institutions in the USA and predicted in-hospital mortality as well as SCORTEN. The predicted mortality rates in this cohort are shown in the table.
ABCD 10 Mortality prediction model score
Validation in other populations is required.
What is the differential diagnosis of SJS/TEN?
In the differential diagnosis of SJS/TEN consider:
Other severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) to drugs (eg, drug hypersensitivity syndrome)
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome and toxic shock syndrome
Erythema multiforme, particularly erythema multiforme major (with mucosal involvement)
Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption (RIME)
Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
Paraneoplastic pemphigus.
What is the treatment for SJS/TEN?
For further details, see Stevens Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis: nursing management.
Care of a patient with SJS/TEN requires:
Cessation of suspected causative drug(s) — the patient is less likely to die, and complications are less if the culprit drug is on or before the day that blisters/erosions appear
Hospital admission — preferably immediately to an intensive care and burns unit with specialist nursing care, as this improves survival, reduces infection and shortens hospital stay
Consider fluidised air bed
Nutritional and fluid replacement (crystalloid) by intravenous and nasogastric routes — reviewed and adjusted daily
Temperature maintenance — as body temperature regulation is impaired, the patient should be in a warm room (30–32C)
Pain relief — as pain can be extreme
Sterile handling and reverse isolation procedures.
Examine daily for the extent of detachment and infection (take swabs for bacterial culture).
Topical antiseptics can be used (eg, silver nitrate, chlorhexidine [but not silver sulfadiazine as it is a sulfa drug])
Dressings such as gauze with petrolatum, non-adherent nanocrystalline-containing silver gauze or biosynthetic skin substitutes such as Biobrane® can reduce pain.
Avoid using adhesive tapes and unnecessary removal of dead skin; leave the blister roof as a ‘biological dressing’.
Daily assessment by an ophthalmologist
Frequent eye drops/ointments (antiseptics, antibiotic, corticosteroid)
Topical oral anaesthetic
If ulcerated, prevent vaginal adhesions using intravaginal steroid ointment, soft vaginal dilators.
Consider aerosols, bronchial aspiration, physiotherapy
May require intubation and mechanical ventilation if trachea and bronchi are involved
Catheter because of genital involvement and immobility
Culture urine for bacterial infection
Psychiatric support for extreme anxiety and emotional lability
Physiotherapy to maintain joint movement and reduce the risk of pneumonia
Regular assessment for staphylococcal or gram negative infection
The appropriate antibiotic should be given if an infection develops; prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended and may even increase the risk of sepsis
Consider heparin to prevent thromboembolism (blood clots).
The role of systemic corticosteroids (cortisone) remains controversial. Some clinicians prescribe high doses of corticosteroids for a short time at the start of the reaction, usually prednisone 1–2 mg/kg/day for 3–5 days. However concerns have been raised that they may increase the risk of infection, impair wound healing and other complications, and they have not been proven to have any benefit. They are not effective later in the course of the illness.
Case reports and small patient series have reported benefit from active adjuvant treatments delivered during the first 24–48 hours of illness. As SJS/TEN is a rare condition, controlled trials of therapies in large numbers of patients are difficult.
Ciclosporin 3–5 mg/kg/day is reported to reduce mortality by 60% compared to patients with similar SCORTEN score on admission that were not treated with ciclosporin. There are contraindications to treatment such as renal impairment.
Other options include:
Anti-TNFα monoclonal antibodies (eg, infliximab, etanercept)
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 2–3 g/kg given over 2–3 days
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCS-F).
Thalidomide, trialled because of its anti-TNFα effect, increased mortality, and should not be used.
How can SJS/TEN be prevented?
People who have survived SJS/TEN must be educated to avoid taking the causative drug or structurally related medicines as SJS/TEN may recur. Cross-reactions can occur between:
The anticonvulsants carbamazepine, phenytoin, lamotrigine and phenobarbital
Beta-lactam antibiotics penicillin, cephalosporin and carbapenem
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Sulfonamides: sulfamethoxazole, sulfadiazine, sulfapyridine.
In the future, we may be able to predict who is at risk of SJS/TEN using genetic screening.
Allopurinol should be prescribed for good indications (eg, gout with hyperuricaemia) and commenced at a low dose (100 mg/day), as SJS/TEN is more likely at doses > 200 mg/day.
What is the outlook for SJS/TEN?
The acute phase of SJS/TEN lasts 8–12 days.
Repithelialisation of denuded areas takes several weeks and is accompanied by peeling of the less severely affected skin. Survivors of the acute phase have increased on-going mortality especially if aged or sick.
Long-term sequelae include:
Pigment change — a patchwork of increased and decreased pigmentation
Skin scarring, especially at sites of pressure or infection
Loss of nails with permanent scarring (pterygium) and failure to regrow
Scarred genitalia — phimosis (constricted foreskin which cannot retract) and vaginal adhesions (occluded vagina)
Lung disease — bronchiolitis, bronchiectasis, obstructive disorders.
Eye problems can lead to blindness:
Dry and watery eyes, which may burn and sting when exposed to light
Conjunctivitis: red, crusted, or ulcerated conjunctiva
Corneal ulcers, opacities and scarring
Symblepharon: adhesion of conjunctiva of the eyelid to the eyeball
Ectropion or entropion: turned-out or turned-in eyelid
Trichiasis: inverted eyelashes
Synechiae: iris sticks to the cornea.
It may take weeks to months for symptoms and signs to settle.
Dyspigmentation Nail shedding Symblepharon
Carr DR, Houshmand E, Heffernan MP. Approach to the acute, generalized, blistering patient. Semin Cutan Med Surg 2007; 26: 139–46. PubMed.
Chantelot L, Gaillet A, Botterel F, Ingen-Housz-Oro S, de Prost N. Candidaemia and Candida colonization in patients with epidermal necrolysis: a retrospective case series. Br J Dermatol. 2024;191(5):841–843. PubMed
Cotliar J. Approach to the patient with a suspected drug eruption. Semin Cutan Med Surg 2007; 26: 147. PubMed
Meth MJ, Sperber KE. Phenotypic diversity in delayed drug hypersensitivity: An immunologic explanation. Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine 2006; 73: 769–76. PubMed.
Mockenhaupt M. Severe drug-induced skin reactions: clinical pattern, diagnostics and therapy. Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft 2009; 7: 142–62. PubMed.
Roujeau J-C. Clinical heterogeneity of drug hypersensitivity. Toxicology 2005; 209: 123–129. PubMed.
Wolf R, Orion E, Marcos B, Matz H. Life-threatening acute adverse cutaneous drug reactions. Clinics in Dermatology 2005; 23; 171–81. PubMed.
Fujita Y, Yoshioka N, Abe R, et al. Rapid Immunochromatographic Test for Serum Granulysin Is Useful for the Prediction of Stevens–Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2011; 65: 65–8. PubMed.
Fernando SL. The management of toxic epidermal necrolysis. Aust J of Dermatol 2012; 53: 165–71. PubMed.
UpToDate accessed 17 January 2016.
González-Herrada C, Rodríguez-Martín S, Cachafeiro L et al; PIELenRed Therapeutic Management Working Group. Cyclosporine Use in Epidermal Necrolysis Is Associated with an Important Mortality Reduction: Evidence from Three Different Approaches. J Invest Dermatol. 2017 Oct;137(10):2092–2100. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2017.05.022. Epub 2017 Jun 17. Review. PubMed PMID: 28634032. PubMed.
Noe MH, Rosenbach M, Hubbard RA, et al. Development and Validation of a Risk Prediction Model for In-Hospital Mortality Among Patients With Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis—ABCD-10. JAMA Dermatol.Published online March 06, 2019. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2018.5605. Journal
Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis: nursing management
Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
Severe cutaneous adverse reaction
Blistering skin conditions
Plasmapheresis for skin disease
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
DermNet e-lectures [Youtube]
Blistering disorders
Understanding Drug Eruptions
Dermatological emergencies
The current understanding of Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Telangiectasia]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/telangiectasia]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Telangiectasia — extra information
Telangiectases, Broken capillaries
Blood vessel problems
4A42.2, EF20.2, 4A01.31, EF20.3, EJ20.3, EJ2Y, EF20.Y, EL61, LA90.00, EF20.4
112641009, 30727005, 703281001, 699056001, 238761009, 247479008, 402648009, 238768003
Blood vessel problems
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2014.
Differential diagnoses
What is telangiectasia?
Telangiectasia is a condition in which there are visible small linear red blood vessels (broken capillaries). These are also called telangiectases. Visible small blood vessels that are blue in colour (spider veins) are called venulectasia because venules are involved.
Telangiectasia Telangiectasia Telangiectasia
What is the differential diagnosis of telangiectasia?
Telangiectases need to be distinguished from other vascular conditions, including blood vessel tumours such as infantile haemangioma and angiomas that arise in adults; and capillary or venous vascular malformations.
Large red blood vessels are arteries and large blue blood vessels are veins. Arteries may be enlarged due to aneurysm formation. Veins enlarged due to the destruction of their valvular system are known as varicose veins.
Classification of telangiectasia
Inherited conditions
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
Benign hereditary telangiectasia
Unilateral naevoid telangiectasia
Angioma serpiginosum
Rothmund Thompson syndrome
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Bloom syndrome (congenital telangiectatic erythema)
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita
Focal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz syndrome)
Note that telangiectasia may be noted as a normal feature of facial skin in some families.
Hereditary telangiectasia
Familial telangiectasia Benign hereditary telangiectasia Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
Acquired telangiectasia
Essential telangiectasia
Sun damaged and aged skin especially in those who smoke
Spider telangiectasis (also called spider naevus)
Progressive annular telangiectasia (a rare condition with no associations)
Poikiloderma of Civatte (sun damage affecting the sides of the neck)
Liver disease particularly when associated with alcohol or viral infection
Systemic sclerosis especially CRST syndrome (which forms telangiectatic mats)
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Mixed connective tissue disease
Mastocytosis, specifically the variant, telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Male genital dysaesthesia
Cutaneous collagenous vasculopathy - histology shows hyalinised collagen surrounding the telangiectatic vessels
Telangiectasia due to disease
CRST syndrome Telangiectasia in mastocytosis Necrobiosis lipoidica
Telangiectasia may follow a cutaneous injury. For example:
Scarring, including hypertrophic and keloid scars
Livedoid vasculopathy and atrophie blanche
Telangiectasia following injury
Radiation site Radiation site Erythema ab igne
Some tumours are characterised by telangiectasia, such as:
Sebaceous hyperplasia
Basal cell carcinoma
Merkel cell carcinoma
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), particularly poikiloderma vasculare variant
Intravascular B-cell lymphoma.
Telangiectasia in skin tumours
Sebaceous hyperplasia Basal cell carcinoma CTCL
Certain medications may give rise to telangiectasia.
Vasodilators especially calcium channel blockers; sun-exposed sites are mainly affected
Long-term systemic corticosteroids
Long-term topical corticosteroids, including steroid rosacea
Intralesional triamcinolone injections
Telangiectasia related to topical steroid use
Steroid-induced telangiectasia Steroid-induced telangiectasia Steroid-induced telangiectasia
What is the treatment of telangiectasia?
Telangiectases are generally harmless. Treatment may be sought because of bleeding or unsightly appearance. Facial red vein treatment methods include:
Intense pulsed light (IPL)
Vascular laser treatment
Essential telangiectasia
Spider telangiectasis
Differential diagnosis of vascular lesions
Ultraviolet radiation
Spider angioma — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Telogen Effluvium]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/telogen-effluvium]
Telogen effluvium (hair shedding)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Telogen effluvium — extra information
ED70.3, ED70.30, ED70.31, ED70.3Y
39479004, 723005006, 87038002, 403328001
Created 1997. Updated by Dr Fen-Lan Cherry Chang, House Officer, Middlemore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct Assoc. Prof. Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. November 2019.
Differential diagnoses
What is telogen effluvium?
Telogen effluvium is the name for a common cause of temporary hair loss due to the excessive shedding of resting or telogen hair after some shock to the system. New hair continues to grow. Telogen hair is also known as a club hair due to the shape of the root.
It should be distinguished from anagen effluvium, in which the hair shedding is due to interruption of active or anagen hair growth by drugs, toxins or inflammation (eg, alopecia areata). Anagen hair has a pointed or tapered tip.
Telogen effluvium Telogen effluvium Hair shedding
Who gets telogen effluvium?
Acute telogen effluvium can affect people of all age groups and both sexes. Chronic telogen effluvium with no clear precipitating cause tends to present in otherwise healthy women 30–60 years of age.
What is the cause of telogen effluvium?
If there is some shock to the system, as many as 70% of the anagen hairs can be precipitated into telogen, thus reversing the usual ratio. Typical triggers include:
Childbirth: postpartum hair loss. This can resolve after a few months or transition into female pattern alopecia.
Physiological neonatal hair loss
Acute or chronic illness, especially if there is fever
Psychological stress
Weight loss, unusual diet, or nutritional deficiency (eg, iron deficiency/)
Endocrine disorders (eg, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism)
Discontinuing the contraceptive pill
Overseas travel resulting in jetlag
Skin disease affecting the scalp (eg, erythroderma)
Excessive sun exposure.
What are the clinical features of acute telogen effluvium?
Telogen effluvium is a non-scarring form of diffuse hair loss with no clinical or histological evidence of inflammation and can affect up to 50% of the scalp hair.
The resting scalp club hairs remain firmly attached to the hair follicles at first. The new hairs coming up through the scalp push out the resting club hairs and increased hair fall is noticed 2 to 4 months after the triggering event.
Thus, paradoxically, with this type of hair loss, hair fall is a sign of hair regrowth.
As the new hair first comes up through the scalp and pushes out the dead hair, a fine fringe of new hair is often evident along the forehead hairline.
Because nail and hair growth are under the same influences, an arrest in hair growth is often mirrored in the nails by a groove across them coinciding with the time of the shock to the system — a Beau line. The time of the shock can be estimated from the fact that a fingernail takes 5 months to grow from the posterior nail fold to the free edge. So if the groove in the nail is halfway down the nail, the shock must have been two and a half months ago.
Beau line Beau line Beau line
Chronic telogen effluvium
In some patients, hair shedding continues to be intermittently or continuously greater than normal for long periods of time, sometimes for years. The hair cycle appears to be reset so that the anagen period is shortened.
Chronic telogen effluvium often presents in women that actually continue to have quite thick and moderately long hair – this is because they notice the shed hair more than those with finer or shorter hair. Telogen effluvium does not cause complete baldness, although it may unmask a genetic tendency to genetic balding i.e. female pattern hair loss, or in men, male pattern hair loss.
The mechanism of chronic telogen effluvium is not well understood. Middle-aged women with a long fluctuating course of telogen effluvium, producing widespread thinning lasting many years have normal hormonal studies.
How is telogen effluvium diagnosed?
Telogen effluvium is usually diagnosed by its clinical features.
Hair thinning involves the entire scalp +/- loss of other body hair.
Examination shows diffuse thinning without focal areas of total alopecia and short hairs of normal thickness.
A gentle hair pull test reveals an increased number of hairs; most are telogen with a typical epithelial sac.
A trichogram can help confirm the diagnosis; more than 25% telogen hairs in a trichogram strongly suggests telogen effluvium.
Light microscopic examination shows club hair
A scalp biopsy is rarely needed; it is expected to show normal terminal/vellus hair ratio, an increased number of telogen follicles, and little to no inflammation and fibrosis.
What is the differential diagnosis for telogen effluvium?
Other forms of hair loss that should be considered include:
Female pattern hair loss (look for a widened part and thinner hair on the anterior and vertex of the scalp)
Male pattern hair loss (as a bi-temporal recession is sometimes seen in telogen effluvium).
Diffuse alopecia areata (look for associated immune phenomena, eg, vitiligo). Scalp biopsy will show a lymphocytic perifollicular infiltrate
Anagen effluvium (which tends to be more severe than telogen effluvium)
Defects of the hair shaft including loose anagen hair syndrome
Congenital hypotrichosis
What is the treatment for telogen effluvium?
Telogen effluvium is self-correcting. Recommendations include:
Gentle handling of the hair, avoiding over-vigorous combing, brushing and any type of scalp massage
Treat any underlying scalp disorder or hormonal problem determined, if any
Ensure a nutritious diet, with plenty of protein, fruit and vegetables.
Correct any abnormality in thyroid function, or levels of iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid.
The psychological effects of hair loss should not be ignored.
What is the outcome for telogen effluvium?
Regrowth usually occurs after removal of the trigger causing telogen effluvium. However, repeated episodes of acute telogen effluvium can sometimes evolve into female pattern hair loss.
Burgdorf W. (2009). Braun-Falco’s dermatology (p. p648). Heidelberg: Springer.
Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV. (2012). Dermatology: 2-Volume Set: Expert Consult Premium Edition-Enhanced Online Features and Print, 3e (Bolognia, Dermatology).
Female pattern hair loss
Psychological effects of hair loss
Skin changes in pregnancy
Trichoscopy of generalised noncicatricial hair loss
Telogen effluvium — Medscape Reference
Telogen effluvium — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Terminology]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/terminology]
Terminology in dermatology
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Terminology in dermatology
Terminology in dermatology — extra information
ED64, ME66.1, ME66.6Z, ME60.Z, ME60.0, EM0Z
55988001, 53534000, 71966008, 1646003, 112629002, 25694009, 95319004, 276322001, 107652000, 72724002, 276323006, 271761007, 364530004, 274672009, 400048001, 95324001, 271807003
Terminology in dermatology
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997.
Describing skin conditions
Structure of the skin
Configuration of lesions
Describing skin conditions
A lesion is any single area of altered skin. It may be solitary or multiple.
A rash is a widespread eruption of lesions.
Dermatosis is a generic term for a disease of the skin.
When examining the skin, a dermatologist assesses distribution, morphology and arrangement of skin lesions: their number, size, and colour, which sites are involved, their symmetry, shape, and arrangement.
The dermatologist will carefully feel individual lesions, noting surface and deep characteristics. Which layer(s) of the skin are involved? If scaly, does the surface flake off easily? If crusted, what is underneath?
Specialised techniques include:
Wood's lamp (long wave UVA) examination for pigmentary changes and fluorescent infections
Dermoscopy for pigmented lesions to diagnose melanoma.
Structure of the skin
The skin is considered to have three parts: the outer epidermis, middle dermis and deep subcutaneous tissue. There is a basement membrane that separates the epidermis from the dermis and acts as a communication channel between the two layers.
The epidermis is a complex ‘brick wall’ made of cells called keratinocytes, which produce a protein called keratin. The epidermis also contains pigment cells called melanocytes, which produce melanin, Langerhans cells, which present antigens to the immune system, and Merkel cells, which have a sensory function.
Basal layer — the columnar or rectangular cells at the bottom of the epidermis from which new cells are continuously produced. Scattered melanocytes are normally found in this layer.
Squamous cells — flat epithelial cells found on the skin surface. The structure of the skin is described as a stratified squamous epithelium, referring to the way the cells are built up in layers.
Granular layer — flattened cells filled with dark granules containing keratohyaline protein.
Horny layer — stacks of dead cells without nuclei make up the dry or keratinised stratum corneum. The top layer of cells loosens and falls off.
Desmosomes — the structures that stick adjacent keratinocytes tightly together, rather like cement between bricks.
Epidermal appendages include:
Eccrine glands, which produce sweat
Apocrine glands, scent glands found in armpits and groins
Pilosebaceous structures containing hair and sebaceous glands
The dermis is made up of connective tissue that supports the epidermis, providing nutrients and protecting it. The papillary dermis is the upper portion beneath the epidermis, and the lower portion is the reticular dermis.
Collagen — a structural protein making up the bulk of the dermis. It is produced by fibroblasts. It is composed of a triple helix of strong fibres.
Elastin — the protein that makes up thin elastic fibres. These are produced by fibroblasts. They return deformed skin to its resting position.
Ground substance — the gel component of the dermis. It contains hyaluronic acid, dermatan sulphate, and chondroitin-6-sulphate (these are anionic polysaccharides or glycosaminoglycans).
Fibroblasts — cells found in the dermis that produce collagen, elastin, ground substance and fibronectin (a glycoprotein).
Nerves — sensory and autonomic fibres with distinct nerve endings for touch, heat, cold, pressure and pain.
Blood vessels — arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules and veins carrying blood to and from the skin.
Lymphatics — an extensive network of thin-walled vessels that nourish and drain the skin.
Arrector pili muscles — these are attached to hair follicles. Contraction results in goosebumps.
Cellular infiltrations — immune cells around blood vessels, and recruited in great numbers to heal wounds and fight infection. Many skin diseases are characterised by specific patterns of these cells.
The subcutaneous tissue, also called subcutis, is made up of adipose cells or lipocytes (fat cells). These are surrounded by connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerves.
Distribution refers to how the skin lesions are scattered or spread out. Skin lesions may be isolated (solitary or single) or multiple. The localisation of multiple lesions in certain regions helps diagnosis, as skin diseases tend to have characteristic distributions. What is the extent of the eruption and its pattern?
Acral — relating to or affecting the distal extremities (eg, ears, fingers, toes, nose, penis and nipples).
Blaschko lines — following the roughly linear, segmental pattern described by Blaschko. Many birthmarks appear to be distributed within these segments.
Dermatomal — lesions confined to one or more segments of skin innervated by a single spinal nerve (dermatomes).
Extensor — involving extensor surfaces of limbs. Contrast with flexor surfaces.
Flexural — related to flexion, or skin folds, such as the backs of knees, the armpits, the elbow creases and the groin.
Follicular — lesions located within or around hair follicles.
Generalised — lesions distributed randomly over most of the body surface area (widespread) or within an anatomical region.
Herpetiform — solid papules within a cluster.
Koebnerised — the appearance of new lesions of skin disease, such as psoriasis, at the site of a trauma.
Photosensitive — increase in the reactivity of the skin to sunlight.
Head and neck — spares eyelids, depth of wrinkles and furrows, areas shadowed by hair, nose and chin. Typically involves “V” of the neck.
Backs of hands — spares finger webs. More severe on proximal than distal phalanges.
Forearms — extensor rather than flexor.
Feet — dorsal surface, sparing areas covered by footwear.
Lower legs — may affect extensor and flexor surfaces
Trunk — dorsal and ventral surfaces (back and front of the torso)
Pressure areas — affecting areas regularly prone to injury from pressure at rest
Tops of the ears when sleeping
Buttocks when sitting
Seborrhoeic — relating to seborrhoea (US English: seborrhea) where there is abnormally increased secretion and discharge of sebum (fatty lubricant matter secreted by sebaceous glands), producing an oily appearance to the skin and the formation of greasy scales.
Seborrhoeic keratosis — a common, harmless warty growth.
Symmetrical – both sides are the same or similar.
Truncal — favours trunk and rarely affects limbs.
Unilateral — the rash affects one side of the bod only.
Configuration of lesions
Configuration refers to the shape or outline of the skin lesions. Skin lesions are often grouped. The pattern or shape may help in diagnosis as many skin conditions have a characteristic configuration.
Nummular lesion — round (coin-shaped) lesions; also known as discoid.
Linear lesion — a linear shape to a lesion often occurs for some external reason, such as scratching; also known as striate.
Target lesion — concentric rings like a dartboard; also known as iris lesion.
Gyrate rash — a rash that appears to be whirling in a circle.
Annular — lesions grouped in a circle.
Descriptive terms used to describe skin colour include:
Carotenoderma — yellow/orange skin hue due to excessive circulating beta-carotene (vitamin a precursor derived from yellow/orange coloured vegetables and fruit); tends to be pronounced on palms and soles, and does not affect the sclera.
Hyperpigmentation — darkened skin compared to normal; it can be localised or generalised.
Hypopigmentation — skin colour that is paler than normal.
Leukoderma — white skin; also known as achromia.
Infarcts — black areas of necrotic tissue due to an interrupted blood supply.
Jaundice — yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eye and is due to a buildup of bile pigments in the blood; this is usually due to biliary or liver disease.
Erythema — red skin due to an increased blood supply; may be applied to any red coloured dermatosis.
Erythroderma — the skin condition affects the whole body or nearly the whole body, which is red all over.
Telangiectasia — prominent cutaneous blood vessels; they are red or purple.
Purpura — bleeding into the skin, either as petechiae (small red, purple or brown spots) or ecchymoses (bruises); purpura does not blanch with pressure (diascopy).
Morphology is the form or structure of an individual skin lesion.
Skin lesions may be flat, elevated above the plane of the skin or depressed below the plane of the skin.
They may be skin coloured or red, pink, violaceous, brown, black, grey, blue, orange, yellow.
Consistency may be soft, firm, hard, fluctuant or sclerosed (scarred or board-like).
The lesions may be hotter or cooler than surrounding skin.
They may be mobile or immobile.
Macule — a small patch of skin that is altered in colour, but is not elevated.
Patch — a large area of colour change, with a smooth surface.
Papule — elevated, solid, palpable lesion that is ≤ 1 cm in diameter. They may be solitary or multiple. Papules may be:
Dome-shaped (rounded)
Filiform (thread-like)
Pedunculated (with a stalk)
Sessile (without a stalk)
Umbilicated (with a central depression)
Nodule — elevated, solid, palpable lesion > 1 cm usually located primarily in the dermis and subcutis (deeper layers of the skin). The greatest portion of the lesion may be above or beneath the skin surface.
Cyst — papule or nodule that contains fluid or semi-fluid material so is fluctuant.
Plaque — a circumscribed, palpable lesion more than 1 cm in diameter; most plaques are elevated. Plaques may result from a coalescence of papules. Most plaques are elevated, but a plaque can also be a thickened area without being visibly raised above the skin surface. They may have well-defined or ill-defined borders. The name 'plaque' is derived from the French word for a plate. Plaques may be:
Annular (ring-shaped)
Polygonal (varied non-geometric shape)
Polymorphic (varied shape)
Serpiginous (in the shape of a snake)
Poikilodermatous (variegated appearance, usually mixed pallor, telangiectasia and pigmentation)
Vesicle — a small blister. It is a circumscribed lesion ≤ 1 cm in diameter that contains liquid (clear, serous or haemorrhagic). They may be single or multiple. The adjective is "vesicular".
Pustule — a circumscribed lesion that contains pus. It is filled with neutrophils and may be white, or yellow. Not all pustules are infected.
Bulla — a large blister. A circumscribed lesion more than 1 cm in diameter that contains liquid (clear, serous or haemorrhagic).
An abscess is a localised collection of pus.
Weal — also spelt ‘wheal’, is a transient elevation of the skin due to dermal oedema, often pale centrally with an erythematous rim and without surface change. Wealing indicates urticaria or an urticaria-like condition.
The skin surface of a skin lesion may be normal or smooth because the pathological process is below the surface, either dermal or subcutaneous. Surface changes indicate epidermal changes are present.
Scaling or hyperkeratosis — an increase in the dead cells on the surface of the skin (stratum corneum). Descriptive terms for scale include:
Desquamation (skin coming off in scales)
Psoriasiform (large white or silver flakes)
Pityriasiform (branny powdery scale)
Lichenoid (apparent scale is tightly adherent to the skin surface)
Keratotic (horny scale)
Exfoliation (peeling skin)
Maceration (moist peeling skin)
Lichenification — caused by chronic rubbing, which results in palpably thickened skin with increased skin markings and lichenoid scale. It occurs in chronic atopic eczema and lichen simplex.
Crusting — the result of plasma exuding through an eroded epidermis. It is rough on the surface and is yellow or brown in colour. Bloody crust appears red, purple or black.
Dystrophy — degeneration or abnormal formation of the skin. It is often used to refer to nail diseases.
Excoriation — a loss of the epidermis and a portion of the dermis due to scratching or an exogenous injury. It may be linear or punctate.
Erosion — a sore due to the superficial or partial destruction of surface tissue such as the skin.
Fissure — a split, crack, erosion or narrow ulceration of the skin.
Fungating — refers to a large malignant tumour that is erupting like a mushroom or fungus.
Granulation tissue — made of a mass of new capillaries and fibrous tissue in a healing wound.
Ulcer — the full-thickness loss of the epidermis plus at least a portion of the dermis; it may extend into the subcutaneous tissue. An ulcer heals with a scar.
Granuloma — a type of inflammation characterised by histiocytes.
Hypertrophy — explains that some component of the skin such as a scar is enlarged or has grown excessively.
Dermatopathological terminology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Tinea Corporis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/tinea-corporis]
Tinea corporis (Body Ringworm) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Tinea corporis — extra information
Tinea circinata, Dermatophytosis of trunk, Body tinea, Tinea glabrosa, Body ringworm
84849002, 240699006, 75868000, 182384005, 403038004, 214600002, 19087001
Created 2003. Updated: Dr Harriet Bell, House Officer, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. November 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is tinea corporis?
Tinea corporis is a superficial fungal infection of the skin that can affect any part of the body, excluding the hands and feet, scalp, face and beard, groin, and nails. It is commonly called ‘ringworm’ as it presents with characteristic ring-shaped lesions.
Typical annular lesions of ringworm
Who gets tinea corporis?
Tinea corporis is found in most parts of the world, but particularly in hot humid climates. It is most commonly seen in children and young adults, however all age groups can be infected including newborns.
Medical risk factors include:
Previous or concurrent tinea infection
Environmental risk factors include:
Infection of household members
Wearing occlusive clothing
A genetic predisposition has been postulated, particularly for tinea imbricata.
What causes tinea corporis?
Tinea corporis is predominantly caused by dermatophyte fungi of the genera Trichophyton and Microsporum. The anthropophilic species T. rubrum is the most common causative agent of tinea corporis worldwide including New Zealand. Other species that may cause tinea corporis include:
M. canis (cats, dogs), and less commonly other zoonotic species including T. verrucosum (cattle), T. equinum (horses) and T. erinacei (hedgehogs).
Tinea corporis is spread by the shedding of fungal spores from infected skin. Transmission is facilitated by a warm, moist environment and the sharing of fomites including bedding, towels, and clothing. Dermatophyte infection elsewhere on the skin, such as tinea pedis, can also be transferred. The incubation period is 1–3 weeks. The dermatophyte invades and spreads in the stratum corneum, but is unable to penetrate deeper layers in healthy skin.
What are the clinical features of tinea corporis?
Tinea corporis initially presents as a solitary circular red patch with a raised scaly leading edge. A lesion spreads out from the centre forming a ring-shape with central hypopigmentation and a peripheral scaly red rim (ringworm). The border can be papular or pustular. Itch is common. With time, multiple lesions can develop which may coalesce to form a polycyclic pattern. The distribution of lesions is typically asymmetrical.
Sharp red scaly margin of tinea corporis Papules and pustules of tinea corporis Asymmetry of tinea corporis
Clinical variants of tinea corporis
Clinical variants of tinea corporis can include the following types.
Kerion — an intense pustular inflammatory reaction due to zoophilic fungi.
Tinea imbricata — extensive concentric rings forming polycyclic plaques with thick scale due to T. concentricum. It is particularly itchy. This variant is common in the Pacific Islands and other equatorial tropical areas.
Tinea incognito — lacks the typical features of tinea corporis due to suppression of the inflammatory reaction following the topical application of corticosteroids or calcineurin inhibitors. Lesions tend to be widespread with poorly defined borders lacking scale and erythema.
Majocchi granuloma — a variant involving the hair follicles and subcutaneous tissue, most commonly found on the limbs after shaving. It presents as perifollicular papules or pustules. T. rubrum is the usual organism.
Bullous tinea corporis — a rare variant presenting with vesicles or blisters.
Clinical variants of tinea corporis
Kerion - inflammatory tinea corporis Majocchi granuloma - invasive tinea corporis Tinea incognito
What are the complications of tinea corporis?
Tinea corporis is contagious, spreading elsewhere on the skin and to others.
Immunosuppressed patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, can present with disseminated infection.
Chronic dermatophytosis is T. rubrum infection of at least four body sites following a prolonged fluctuating course and recurrence despite treatment.
Dermatophytide reactions are an allergic rash at a distant site caused by an inflammatory fungal infection.
Secondary bacterial infection with Staph aureus is common in children with atopic dermatitis and tinea corporis.
How is tinea corporis diagnosed?
Tinea corporis should be considered in the setting of a solitary patch or asymmetrical rash and confirmed on mycology to determine the likely source.
Examination should include the entire skin surface, including the scalp and nails, for other sites of involvement.
Dermoscopy may assist the clinical diagnosis with features of erythema, white scaling, peripheral or patchy distribution of blood vessels, tiny follicular papules, brown spots surrounded by white-yellow rings, and wavy or broken hairs.
Skin scrapings taken from the scaly lesion edge and mounted in 10–20% potassium hydroxide can be examined under a light microscope for hyphae and spores. Fungal culture of the skin scrapings provides identification of the causative organism (see Laboratory tests for fungal infection).
Tinea corporis is sometimes diagnosed on skin biopsy, and characteristic histology changes are seen (see Tinea corporis pathology). Histology is typically required for the diagnosis of Majocchi granuloma.
What is the differential diagnosis for tinea corporis?
The differential diagnosis for tinea corporis can include:
Pityriasis rosea herald patch
Seborrhoeic dermatitis.
What is the treatment for tinea corporis?
Localised tinea corporis may respond to topical antifungal medications such as imidazoles and terbinafine. Application needs to include an adequate margin around the lesion and a prolonged course continuing for at least 1–2 weeks after the visible rash has cleared. However, recurrence is common.
Oral antifungal treatment is usually required if tinea corporis is involving a hair-bearing site, is extensive, or has failed to clear with topical antifungals. Systemic therapy is also required for Majocchi granuloma and tinea imbricate. Recommended oral agents are terbinafine and itraconazole.
What is the outcome for tinea corporis?
With appropriate treatment and good patient compliance, tinea corporis can be cured. However, recurrence or re-infection can occur if treatment has stopped too soon, or the source of infection has not been identified and treated.
Astvad, K. M. T., & Saunte, D. M. L. (2025). Sexual transmission of a new emerging dermatophyte: T. Mentagrophytes genotype VII. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology, 39(2), 245–246. doi:10.1111/jdv.20402. Journal
El-Gohary M, van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, et al. Topical antifungal treatments for tinea cruris and tinea corporis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(8):CD009992. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009992.pub2. PubMed Central
Kermani F, Moosazadeh M, Hosseini SA, Bandalizadeh Z, Barzegari S, Shokohi T. Tinea gladiatorum and dermatophyte contamination among wrestlers and in wrestling halls: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Microbiol. 2020;77(4):602–11. doi:10.1007/s00284-019-01816-3. Journal
Leung AK, Lam JM, Leong KF, Hon KL. Tinea corporis: an updated review. Drugs Context. 2020;9:2020-5-6. doi:10.7573/dic.2020-5-6. PubMed Central
Moriarty B, Hay R, Morris-Jones R. The diagnosis and management of tinea. BMJ. 2012;345:e4380. doi:10.1136/bmj.e4380. PubMed
Sahoo AK, Mahajan R. Management of tinea corporis, tinea cruris, and tinea pedis: A comprehensive review. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2016;7(2):77–86. doi:10.4103/2229-5178.178099. PubMed Central
Singh D, Patel DC, Rogers K, Wood N, Riley D, Morris AJ. Epidemiology of dermatophyte infection in Auckland, New Zealand. Australas J Dermatol. 2003;44(4):263–6. doi:10.1046/j.1440-0960.2003.00005.x. PubMed
Fungal skin infections
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Mycology of dermatophyte infections
Tinea corporis pathology
Treatment of fungal infection
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Tinea corporis — Medscape Reference
Ringworm on body (tinea corporis) — emedicinehealth
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Tinea Cruris]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/tinea-cruris]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Tinea cruris — extra information
Jock itch, Dhobi itch, Tinea inguinalis, Groin tinea, Genitocrural dermatophytosis
399029005, 12804006, 39084003
Authors: Created 2003; Updated Katrina Tan, Medical Student, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Dr Martin Keefe, Dermatologist, Christchurch, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. June 2021
Differential diagnoses
What is tinea cruris?
Tinea cruris, also known as ‘jock itch’, is a specific form of tinea due to a dermatophyte fungus affecting the groin, pubic region, and adjacent thigh. It presents as an acute or chronic asymmetrical rash.
Unilateral rash in groin Raised border and central clearing Well-defined plaque
Who gets tinea cruris?
Tinea cruris affects both sexes, with a male predominance (3:1). All ages can develop tinea cruris, adolescents and adults more commonly than children and the elderly. Tinea cruris can affect all races, being particularly common in hot humid tropical climates.
Predisposing factors for tinea cruris include:
Longstanding tinea pedis
Previous episodes of tinea cruris
Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis)
Topical steroid use.
What causes tinea cruris?
Tinea cruris is caused by a dermatophyte fungus, most commonly Trichophyton rubrum and Epidermophyton floccosum.
Spread of the infection to the groin is commonly from the feet (tinea pedis) or nails (tinea unguium) by scratching or use of contaminated towels or bed sheets.
What are the clinical features of tinea cruris?
Tinea cruris usually begins in the inguinal (groin) skin fold on one side which can evolve to become a bilateral but characteristically asymmetrical rash.
The rash can extend down the inner aspect of the thigh or to the lower abdomen and pubic area.
Involvement of the buttocks and perineum may be seen but there is typically sparing of the penis, scrotum, and vulva.
Acute tinea cruris may present as a moist and exudative rash.
Chronic tinea cruris presents as a large well-demarcated scaly plaque with a raised border and central clearing.
Scale is most prominent at the leading edge of the plaque.
Dermatophytic folliculitis may present as papules and pustules along the border.
Tinea cruris is usually itchy.
Wood lamp examination does not demonstrate fluorescence.
Scaly rash in inguinal skin fold Bilateral but asymmetrical rash Raised border, central clearing
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Tinea cruris often causes marked hyperpigmentation in skin of colour.
Dermoscopy of tinea cruris
Brown spots with white/yellow halo
Follicular micropustules
Morse code hairs — indicate invasion of vellus hairs
What are the complications of tinea cruris?
Maceration and secondary infection with bacteria or candida
Secondary excoriation, lichenification, and pigmentation
Tinea incognito due to use of topical steroids
How is tinea cruris diagnosed?
Tinea cruris should be considered in the clinical setting of an asymmetrical scaly rash in the groin and confirmed on a skin scraping for mycology [see Laboratory tests for fungal infections].
Skin biopsy may be performed, usually to exclude other flexural skin conditions [see Skin diseases and conditions affecting body folds]. Histology demonstrates branching septate hyphae on special stains [see Tinea corporis pathology].
What is the differential diagnosis for tinea cruris?
Flexural infections eg, candidal intertrigo, erythrasma
Flexural dermatose eg, flexural psoriasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis, benign familial pemphigus
Langerhans cell histiocytosis — a rare cause of a flexural rash in a very young child
Erythrasma Flexural psoriasis Benign familial pemphigus
What is the treatment for tinea cruris?
General and preventative measures
Careful towelling after washing to avoid transfer of fungi from the feet
Loose fitting clothing
Treatment of triggers such as hyperhidrosis or obesity
Topical antifungal powder after bathing
Topical antifungal medication such as imidazoles or terbinafine
Oral antifungal medication for extensive or recalcitrant infection, particularly in immunosuppressed patients eg, griseofulvin, terbinafine, itraconazole
Treatment of tinea at other sites such as tinea pedis or tinea unguium
Mild topical steroid can be used short-term to reduce itch, but is not appropriate as a monotherapy or long-term
What is the outcome for tinea cruris?
Andrews MD, Burns M. Common tinea infections in children. Am Fam Physician. 2008;77(10):1415–20. Journal
Bhat YJ, Keen A, Hassan I, Latif I, Bashir S. Can dermoscopy serve as a diagnostic tool in dermatophytosis? A pilot study. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2019;10(5):530–5. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_423_18. Journal
Bhatia A, Kanish B, Badyal DK, Kate P, Choudhary S. Efficacy of oral terbinafine versus itraconazole in treatment of dermatophytic infection of skin - a prospective, randomized comparative study. Indian J Pharmacol. 2019;51(2):116-19. doi:10.4103/ijp.IJP_578_17. Journal
El-Gohary M, van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, et al. Topical antifungal treatments for tinea cruris and tinea corporis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(8):CD009992. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009992.pub2. Journal
Ely JW, Rosenfeld S, Seabury Stone M. Diagnosis and management of tinea infections. Am Fam Physician. 2014;90(10):702–10. Journal
Patel GA, Wiederkehr M, Schwartz RA. Tinea cruris in children. Cutis. 2009;84(3):133–7. PubMed
Sahoo AK, Mahajan R. Management of tinea corporis, tinea cruris, and tinea pedis: a comprehensive review. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2016;7(2):77–86. doi:10.4103/2229-5178.178099. Journal
Thakur R, Kalsi AS. Updates on genital dermatophytosis. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2020;13:743–50. doi:10.2147/CCID.S262704. Journal
Zhao D, Chen B, Wang YT, Jiao CH. Topical clotrimazole cream for the treatment of tinea cruris: a retrospective study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020;99(47):e23189. doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000023189. Journal
Fungal skin infections
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infection
Mycology of dermatophyte infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Ringworm information for healthcare professionals — Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Tinea cruris — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Tinea Pedis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/tinea-pedis]
Tinea pedis (fungal foot infection)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Tinea pedis — extra information
Athletes foot, Ringworm of foot, Dermatophytosis of foot
6020002, 25956006, 43581009, 403055000, 75996005, 403054001
Original page created in 2003. Updated by Dr Thomas Stewart, General Practitioner, Sydney, Australia. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. April 2018.
Differential diagnoses
What is tinea pedis?
Tinea pedis is a foot infection due to a dermatophyte fungus. It is the most common dermatophyte infection and is particularly prevalent in hot, tropical, urban environments.
Interdigital involvement is most commonly seen (this presentation is also known as athlete’s foot, although some people use the term for any kind of tinea pedis).
Tinea pedis may be accompanied by tinea cruris, tinea manuum or tinea unguium.
What causes tinea pedis?
The three most common dermatophyte fungi causing tinea pedis are:
Trichophyton (T.) rubrum
T. interdigitale, previously called T. mentagrophytes var. interdigitale
Epidermophyton floccosum
Moccasin tinea pedis Tinea pedis Tinea pedis Tinea pedis Tinea pedis Tinea pedis
Who gets tinea pedis?
Other risk factors include:
Occlusive footwear (for example, heavy industrial boots)
Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis)
Underlying immunodeficiency or diabetes mellitus
Systemic corticosteroids or immune suppressive medications
Poor peripheral circulation or lymphoedema.
What are the clinical features of tinea pedis?
Tinea pedis tends to be asymmetrical, and may be unilateral. It usually presents in one of three ways:
Itchy erosions and/or scales between the toes, especially between 4th and 5th toes
Scale covering the sole and sides of the feet (hyperkeratotic/moccasin type, usually caused by T. rubrum)
Small to medium-sized blisters, usually affecting the inner aspect of the foot (vesiculobullous type).
It can also uncommonly cause oozing and ulceration between the toes (ulcerative type), or pustules (these are more common in tinea pedis due to T. interdigitale than that due to T. rubrum).
How is the diagnosis of tinea pedis made?
Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings, which are sent for microscopy in potassium hydroxide (when segmented hyphae may be observed) and culture (mycology). Culture may not be necessary if typical fungal elements are observed on microscopy.
What is the differential diagnosis of tinea pedis?
The differential diagnosis of tinea pedis includes:
Psoriasis (plantar psoriasis)
Plantar keratoderma.
These inflammatory disorders are more likely to be symmetrical and bilateral. Mycology is negative.
What is the treatment for tinea pedis?
General measures should be first-line, including meticulous drying of feet, especially between the toes, avoidance of occlusive footwear, and the use of barrier protection (sandals) in communal facilities. Finger socks can help separate the toes, reducing humidity and help clear infection.
Topical antifungal therapy once or twice daily is usually sufficient. These include azoles, allylamines, butenafine, ciclopirox, and tolnaftate. A typical course is 2 to 4 weeks, but single dose regimes can be successful for mild infection [1,2].
For those who do not respond to topical therapy, an oral antifungal agent may be needed for a few weeks. These include:
Griseofulvin (this may be inferior to other oral agents and may not be available in some countries) [3,4].
Patients with the hyperkeratotic variant of tinea pedis may benefit from the addition of a topical keratolytic cream containing salicylic acid or urea [5].
How can recurrence of tinea pedis be prevented?
To minimise recurrence of tinea pedis:
Dry feet and toes meticulously after bathing
Use desiccating foot powder once or twice daily
Avoid wearing occlusive footwear for long periods
Thoroughly dry shoes and boots
Clean the shower and bathroom floors using a product containing bleach
Treat shoes with antifungal powder.
If treatment of tinea pedis is unsuccessful, consider reinfection, coexistent untreated fungal nail infection, reinfection due to untreated family member, or an alternative diagnosis.
Crawford F, Hollis S. Topical treatments for fungal infections of the skin and nails of the foot. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007; 18(3): CD001434. PubMed
Korting HC, Tietz HJ, Bräutigam M, Mayser P, Rapatz G, Paul C. One week terbinafine 1% cream (Lamisil) once daily is effective in the treatment of interdigital tinea pedis: a vehicle controlled study. LAS-INT-06 Study Group. Med Mycol. 2001; 39(4): 335–40. PubMed
Gupta AK, Cooper EA. Update in antifungal therapy of dermatophytosis. Mycopathologia. 2008; 166 (5-6): 353. DOI: 10.1007/s11046-008-9109-0. PubMed
Bell-Syer SE, Khan SM, Torgerson DJ. Oral treatments for fungal infections of the skin of the foot. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 10: CD003584. PubMed
Kircik LH, Onumah N. Use of naftifine hydrochloride 2% cream and 39% urea cream in the treatment of tinea pedis complicated by hyperkeratosis. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014 Feb. 13(2): 162–5. Journal
Introduction to fungal infections
Laboratory tests for fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Mycology of dermatophyte infections
Conditions affecting the feet
Fungal infections of the skin — DermNet e-lecture [Youtube]
Tinea pedis — Medscape Reference
Patient information: Ringworm, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (The Basics) – UpToDate (for subscribers)
Patient information: Ringworm (including athlete's foot and jock itch) (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Management of Tinea Pedis — International Foundation for Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Topical Antifungal Medication]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/topical-antifungal-medication]
Topical antifungal medications
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Topical antifungal medication
Topical antifungal medication — extra information
Infections, Treatments
T49.0, B37.0, B37.2, B37.3, B35.1
1F23.13, 1F23.10, 1F23.0, 1F28.1, 1F28.0
773126007, 350196005, 771822002, 771929005, 771735002, 72605008, 79740000, 187017007, 238408000, 414941008, 23484001, 5441008, 6064005, 448598008
Topical antifungal medication
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2003.
Topical antifungal medication
Scalp antifungal agents
Preparations for nail fold infections
Preparations for nail plate infections
Preparations for oral infections
Preparations for a vaginal infection
Combination products
Antifungal drug resistance
What is a fungal skin infection?
Fungal skin infections are caused by:
Dermatophytes, resulting in tinea corporis, tinea cruris, tinea faciei, tinea manuum, tinea pedis, tinea capitis and tinea barbae
Yeasts, resulting in candida intertrigo and pityriasis versicolor
Moulds, resulting in tinea nigra and nail plate infections.
What is a topical antifungal medication?
A topical antifungal medication is a cream, solution, lotion, powder, gel, spray or lacquer applied to the skin surface to treat a fungal infection.
Many antifungal medications are suitable for both dermatophyte and yeast infections. Others are more specific to one or the other type of fungus. Those unsuitable for dermatophyte fungal infections are marked with an asterisk (*) in the list that follows.
Whitfield ointment (3% salicylic acid, 6% benzoic acid in petrolatum)
Undecylenic alkanolamide
How are topical antifungal agents used?
Topical antifungals can be obtained over the counter without a doctor's prescription. They are generally applied to the affected area twice daily for two to four weeks, including a margin of several centimetres of normal skin. Treatment should continue for one or two weeks after the last visible rash has cleared. They can often cure a localised infection, although recurrence is common so repeated treatment is often necessary.
Scalp antifungal agents
Antifungal shampoos are mainly used to treat dandruff / seborrhoeic dermatitis but are used as an adjunct for tinea capitis and scalp psoriasis.
The most effective ingredients are ketoconazole, miconazole and ciclopirox (Stieprox® liquid), but many other shampoos marketed for dandruff have antifungal properties.
Preparations for nail fold infections
There are many antiseptic and antifungal preparations to control nail fold infections (paronychia). They should be applied two or three times daily for several months.
Clotrimazole solution
Sulfacetamide 15% in spirit
Preparations for nail plate infections
Distal onychomycosis can be treated with an antifungal lacquer applied once or twice weekly. The medication should be applied to the surface of the cleaned nail plate after it has been roughened using an emery board. Extra lacquer should be applied under the edge of the nail.
These can be expected to reduce and sometimes cure the infection, provided that:
No more than 50% of the nail plate is infected
The growing part of the nail plate (the matrix) is not involved
There is no complicating internal disease (such as diabetes) or skin condition (such as psoriasis).
Available preparations are:
Bifonazole cream + urea ointment
Efinaconazole solution
Tavaborole solution.
Treatment needs to be undertaken for long periods (a year or longer) because nails take a long time to grow, especially in older individuals. Nail polish is not recommended, in case it interferes with the efficacy of the product, although this is not proven.
Preparations for oral infections
Oral candidiasis can be treated with:
Note: miconazole oral gel should not be used in patients who are taking warfarin because it has been reported to cause a dangerous interaction, which could result in serious bleeding.
Preparations for a vaginal infection
Vulvovaginal candidiasis can be treated with:
* Unsuitable for dermatophyte fungal infections
Combination products
Topical antifungals may be sold with an oral antifungal medication, for example, fluconazole capsule in combination with clotrimazole cream.
Antifungal creams are sometimes combined with:
Hydrocortisone or another topical steroid
Both topical steroid and antibacterial agent.
A strong topical steroid can mask the fungal infection, and, as they are not curative, they can result in more extensive infection (tinea incognito) and adverse effects such as cutaneous atrophy.
When should an oral antifungal medication be used?
Oral antifungal medications may be required for a fungal infection if:
It is extensive or severe
It resists topical antifungal therapy
It affects hair-bearing areas (tinea capitis and tinea barbae).
Antifungal drug resistance
In recent years, both topical and oral allylamine and triazole antifungal drug resistance has become a problem, particularly in the Indian subcontinent.
Extensive therapy-resistant dermatophyte infection should prompt this as a possible problem. Where available, fungal culture and estimation of drug minimum inhibitory concentration determined to guide appropriate medication
For more information, see antifungal drug resistance.
*New Zealand approved datasheets are the official source of information for these prescription medicines, including approved uses and risk information. Check the individual New Zealand datasheet on the Medsafe website.*
Introduction to fungal infections
Treatment of fungal infections
Oral antifungal medications
Consumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements — MedlinePlus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Topical Steroid]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/topical-steroid]
Topical steroids (corticosteroid creams)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Topical steroid — extra information
Topical corticosteroid
NE60, 1F28.Y, PL00, 9C61.2A, ED90.Y, PH48, EE40.32, EE40.0, EE40.1Y, ED90.1
304275008, 403648001, 403656003, 403653006, 404647000, 1654001, 293141009, 403651008, 403655004, 448598008, 6064005
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated 4 January 2016.
New Zealand preparations
Bans in cosmetic products
What is a topical steroid?
A topical steroid is an anti-inflammatory preparation used to control eczema/dermatitis and many other skin conditions. Topical steroids are available in creams, ointments, solutions and other vehicles.
Topical steroids are also called topical corticosteroids, glucocorticosteroids, and cortisone.
Topical steroids in differing vehicles
How does a topical steroid work?
The effects of topical steroid on various cells in the skin are:
The potency of topical steroid
The potency of a topical steroid depends on:
The specific molecule
The amount that reaches the target cell
Absorption through the skin (0.25%–3%)
There is little point in diluting a topical steroid, as their potency does not depend much on concentration and diluting the product does not reduce the risk of adverse effects. After the first 2 or 3 applications, there is no additional benefit from applying a topical steroid more than once daily.
A topical steroid is absorbed in different rates depending on skin thickness.
The greatest absorption occurs through the thin skin of eyelids, genitals, and skin creases when a potent topical steroid is best avoided.
The least absorption occurs through the thick skin of palms and soles, where a mild topical steroid is ineffective.
Absorption also depends on the vehicle in which the topical steroid is delivered and is greatly enhanced by occlusion.
Formulations of topical steroid
Several formulations are available for topical steroids, intended to suit the type of skin lesion and its location. Creams and lotions are general purpose and are the most popular formulations.
The most suitable formulation for dry, non-hairy skin
Occlusive, increasing risk of folliculitis and miliaria
Useful in hair-bearing skin
Has an astringent (drying) effect
Stings inflamed skin
Steroid impregnated tape
Self-adhesive plastic tapes
Contain corticosteroid, often fludroxycortide, in the adhesive
Not available in all countries
As a general rule, use the weakest possible steroid that will do the job. It is often appropriate to use a potent preparation for a short time to ensure the skin condition clears completely.
Combination products
Topical steroid is sometimes combined with another active ingredient, including antibacterial, antifungal agent or calcipotriol. Topical corticosteroid/antibiotic preparations should be used rarely, and short-term (eg, three times daily for one week for a small area of infected dermatitis), to reduce the risk of antimicrobial resistance.
Which topical steroids are available in New Zealand?
Topical steroids are medicines regulated by Health Authorities. They are classified according to their strength. Their strength may be displayed on the packaging in some countries (eg, UK).
Very potent or superpotent (up to 600 times as potent as hydrocortisone)
Clobetasol propionate
Betamethasone dipropionate (in an optimised vehicle)
Potent (100–150 times as potent as hydrocortisone)
Betamethasone valerate
Betamethasone dipropionate (cream, ointment, gel)
Diflucortolone valerate
Methylprednisolone aceponate
Moderate (2–25 times as potent as hydrocortisone)
Clobetasone butyrate
Hydrocortisone 17-butyrate
Triamcinolone acetonide
Hydrocortisone acetate
What are the side effects of topical steroid?
Side effects are uncommon or rare when topical steroids are used appropriately under medical supervision. Topical steroid may be falsely blamed for a sign when underlying disease or another condition is responsible (for example, postinflammatory hypopigmentation or undertreated atopic eczema).
Internal side effects similar to those due to systemic steroid (Cushing syndrome) are rarely reported from topical steroids, and only after long-term use of large quantities of topical steroid (eg > 50 g of clobetasol propionate or > 500 g of hydrocortisone per week).
Cutaneous side effects
Local side effects may arise when a potent topical steroid is applied daily for long periods of time (months). Most reports of side effects describe prolonged use of an unnecessarily potent topical steroid for inappropriate indications.
Skin thinning (atrophy)
Stretch marks (striae) in armpits or groin
Easy bruising (senile/solar purpura) and tearing of the skin
Enlarged blood vessels (telangiectasia)
Localised increased hair thickness and length (hypertrichosis)
A topical steroid can cause, aggravate or mask skin infections such as impetigo, tinea, herpes simplex, malassezia folliculitis and molluscum contagiosum. Note: topical steroid remains the first-line treatment for infected eczema.
A potent topical steroid applied for weeks to months or longer can lead to:
Periorificial dermatitis (common); this can occur in children
Symptoms due to topical corticosteroid withdrawal
Adverse effects of topical steroids
Bruising Skin thinning Tinea incognita Prominent capillaries Stretch marks Localised pustular psoriasis
A topical steroid should be used cautiously on eyelid skin, where it commonly results in periocular dermatitis. Potentially, excessive use over weeks to months might lead to glaucoma or cataracts.
Topical steroid in pregnancy
Mild and moderate-potency topical steroids can be safely used in pregnancy. Caution should be used for potent and ultrapotent topical steroids used over large areas or under occlusion, of which a proportion will be absorbed systemically.
Reports of low birth-weight infants exposed to high-dose topical steroid are not thought to be due to the medication.
How to use a topical steroid
Topical steroid is applied once daily (usually at night) to inflamed skin for a course of 5 days to several weeks. After that, it is usually stopped, or the strength or frequency of application is reduced.
Emollients can be applied before or after the application of topical steroid, to relieve irritation and dryness or as a barrier preparation. Infection may need additional treatment.
The fingertip unit guides the amount of topical steroid to be applied to a body site. One unit describes the amount of cream squeezed out of its tube onto the volar aspect of the terminal phalanx of the index finger.
The quantity of cream in a fingertip unit varies with sex, age and body part.
- Adult male: one fingertip unit provides 0.5 g
- Adult female: one fingertip unit provides 0.4 g
- Child aged 4 years: approximately 1/3 of the adult amount
- Infant 6 months to 1 year: approximately 1/4 of the adult amount
- One hand: apply 1 fingertip unit
One arm: apply 3 fingertip units
One foot: apply 2 fingertip units
One leg: apply 6 fingertip units
Face and neck: apply 2.5 fingertip units
Trunk, front & back: 14 fingertip units
Illegal topical corticosteroid in cosmetic products
Topical corticosteroids are regulated. However, a potent steroid is illegally present in some cosmetic products purchased over the counter or via the Internet, according to reports from China and several developing countries. This has resulted in many reports of steroid-dependent periorificial dermatitis, rosacea and other adverse effects.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Mooney E, Rademaker M, Dailey R, Daniel BS, et al. Adverse effects of topical corticosteroids in paediatric eczema: Australasian consensus statement. Australas J Dermatol. 2015 Mar 6. doi: 10.1111/ajd.12313. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 25752907.
MIMS Online accessed 22 February 2014
Can topical steroids be applied at the same time as emollients? Medicines Q&As. NHS
Corticosteroids (Ch. 25). In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP, editors. Bolognia Textbook of Dermatology. 2nd ed. Mosby Elsevier publishing; 2008.
Xie H, Xiao X, Li J. Topical Steroids in Chinese Cosmetics. JAMA Dermatol. 2017;153(9): 855–6. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1615. Journal.
Adrenal Suppression Associated with the Use of Topical Corticosteroids. Medsafe. Prescriber Update 38(4): 52–3. December 2017.
Intralesional steroids
Topical corticosteroid withdrawal
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Topical Corticosteroids Medical Education (UK)
CorticoCalc Corticocream Calculator — a Mobile app that helps assess potency and quantity of topical steroids
Consumer medicine information and data sheets – Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements – MedlinePlus
International Topical Steroid Awareness Network
The Australasian College of Dermatologists Consensus Statement Topical corticosteroids in paediatric eczema (PDF)
The Australasian College of Dermatologists Patient Q and A: Topical steroids for the treatment of eczema (PDF)
The Australasian College of Dermatologists Patient Fact Sheet: How to apply topical steroids for the treatment of eczema (PDF)
How to use topical steroids – Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust – YouTube
MyMedicines (New Zealand Formulary)
Hydrocortisone, hydrocortisone butyrate, clobetasol, clobetasone, triamcinolone, betamethasone scalp application, betamethasone cream/ointment, betamethasone lotion, methylprednisolone, diflucortolone, mometasone cream/ointment, mometasone lotion
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Transient Acantholytic Dermatosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/transient-acantholytic-dermatosis]
Grover Disease - Transient Acantholytic Dermatosis: DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Transient acantholytic dermatosis
Transient acantholytic dermatosis — extra information
Grover disease, Persistent and recurrent acantholytic dermatosis
Transient acantholytic dermatosis
Last reviewed: May 2023
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, New Zealand, 1997 (further updates 2016, 2021)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson (2023)Edited by the DermNet content department
Differential diagnoses
What is transient acantholytic dermatosis?
Transient acantholytic dermatosis, also known as Grover disease, is a common, acquired, itchy, truncal rash characterised by acantholysis on histopathology.
Transient acantholytic dermatosis
Who gets transient acantholytic dermatosis?
Transient acantholytic dermatosis most often affects Caucasian men over 50 years of age with sundamaged skin (mean age at diagnosis 61 years). It is less common in skin of colour, women, and younger adults.
Risk factors include sun-exposure, sweating, fever, malignancy, and being hospitalised or bedridden. A Grover-like rash has been reported during the febrile phase of COVID-19.
Transient acantholytic dermatosis is increasingly reported with the use of BRAF-inhibitors such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib monotherapy, and cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs.
What causes transient acantholytic dermatosis?
The cause of transient acantholytic dermatosis is unknown. Due to the frequent association with skin occlusion, heat, and sweating, one theory suggests Grover disease is due to sweat duct damage and occlusion.
Drug-induced transient acantholytic dermatosis may be due to the drug or its metabolites being excreted in the sweat with toxic effects on the adjacent epidermis causing acantholysis and dyskeratosis. BRAF-induced Grover disease may result from keratinocyte proliferation via activation of the MAP-kinase pathway.
SARS-CoV-2 was demonstrated on immunohistochemistry in the sweat gland epithelium and dermal vessels in a patient with COVID-19.
What are the clinical features of transient acantholytic dermatosis?
Grover disease often starts quite suddenly. Some (but not all) studies report it is more common in winter than in summer.
The most common sites affected are central back, mid chest, and upper arms.
Lesions are small red, crusted, or eroded papules and vesicles
The rash is typically intensely itchy.
Transient acantholytic dermatosis
What are the complications of transient acantholytic dermatosis?
Transient acantholytic dermatosis may be complicated by the development of dermatitis, usually in a discoid pattern with round or oval, dry or crusted plaques. The plaques start on the chest and back and may spread to affect the limbs.
How is transient acantholytic dermatosis diagnosed?
Transient acantholytic dermatosis is usually diagnosed clinically, but a skin biopsy may be necessary.
The pathology of transient acantholytic dermatosis is characteristic, with acantholysis (separated skin cells) with or without dyskeratosis (abnormal rounded skin cells). Spongiotic dermatitis may also be noted. Four histological patterns are recognised, not all of which show the classic acantholytic pattern.
What is the differential diagnosis for transient acantholytic dermatosis?
Folliculitis such as malassezia folliculitis or gram-negative folliculitis
What is the treatment of transient acantholytic dermatosis?
There is no curative treatment for Grover disease, but the following suggestions may relieve the itch and hasten resolution.
Remain cool, as sweating may induce more itchy spots.
Moisturising creams or antipruritic lotions containing menthol and camphor can reduce the desire to scratch.
Topical trichloroacetic acid
Apply a topical steroid, if possible as a lotion, to relieve itch.
Topical steroid/vitamin D analogue combination ointment
Oral retinoids (eg, acitretin)
Phototherapy and photochemotherapy
How can transient acantholytic dermatosis be prevented?
Keep cool and wear garments designed to prevent sweat rash.
If using a BRAF-inhibitor, the addition of a MEK-inhibitor seems to protect against the development of transient acantholytic dermatosis.
What is the outlook for transient acantholytic dermatosis?
The duration of transient acantholytic dermatosis is variable although spontaneous self-resolution in 2-4 weeks is typical. It can come and go, often with a seasonal variation. Although it is called transient, Grover disease is often relapsing and can be chronic persisting for years.
Beer J, Rosenbach M. Grover disease associated with chemotherapy: review of potential pathophysiology, current treatments, and future directions. J Drugs Dermatol. 2020;19(11):1056-64. doi:10.36849/JDD.2020.5648 PubMed
Boix-Vilanova J, Gracia-Darder I, Saus C, et al. Grover-like skin eruption: another cutaneous manifestation in a COVID-19 patient. Int J Dermatol. 2020;59(10):1290-2. doi:10.1111/ijd.15104. Journal
Galamgam J, Lee DJ. Treatment of transient acantholytic dermatosis with liquid nitrogen. JAAD Case Rep. 2020;6(4):341-343. Journal
Singh AG, Tchanque-Fossuo CN, Elwood H, Durkin JR. BRAF inhibitor and hairy cell leukemia-related transient acantholytic dermatosis. Dermatol Online J. 2020;26(2):13030/qt3ps33564. Journal
Weaver J, Bergfeld WF. Grover disease (transient acantholytic dermatosis). Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2009;133(9):1490-4. doi:10.5858/133.9.1490. Journal
Transient acantholytic dermatosis pathology
Scaly skin conditions
Blistering skin conditions
The differential diagnosis of itchy skin
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Ultraviolet Radiation And Human Health]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/ultraviolet-radiation-and-human-health]
Ultraviolet radiation and human health
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Ultraviolet radiation and human health
Ultraviolet radiation and human health — extra information
Effects of ultraviolet light
W89.9, L57, L57.8, L56.8, X32, W88, W90, W89
EJ4Z, EJ2Y, EJ20, 9B62
41355003, 286631004, 286632006, 313093000, 402166000, 40057008, 43982006, 238513004, 403219000, 733209003, 402165001
Ultraviolet radiation and human health
Author: Dr Dhawshini Ravindran, Core Medicine Trainee, Northamptonshire Healthcare, NHS Foundation Trust, Kettering, England. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy-edited by Maria McGivern/Gus Mitchell. January 2018.
This article was supported by an educational grant from La Roche-Posay, distributors of sun protection and skin care products in New Zealand and Australia. Sponsorship does not influence content.
Factors of greater exposure
The ozone hole and the Montreal Protocol
How does ultraviolet radiation affect the skin?
UV radiation and skin cancer
UV radiation and the eyes
UV radiation and the immune system
What is ultraviolet radiation?
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) forms part of the electromagnetic spectrum — the energy emitted from the sun. UVR is categorised according to wavelength, which ranges from 100–400 nm.
UVR is involved in tanning, accelerated skin ageing, ocular damage, and the development of skin cancer.
UVR also has beneficial effects due to the production of vitamin D in the skin and its immune-modulating effects on inflammatory skin diseases.
Other sources of ultraviolet radiation
Artificial sources of UV include tanning booths and mercury vapour lighting; some halogen, fluorescent, and incandescent lights; and some forms of lasers.
Types of ultraviolet radiation
Ultraviolet A radiation
Ultraviolet A radiation (UVA) is long wavelength UVR (wavelength: 315–400 nm).
UVA passes through the whole atmosphere and accounts for 95% of UVR reaching the Earth's surface.
It penetrates through an individual's epidermis into the dermis.
UVA has lower energy than ultraviolet B radiation (UVB) and causes less damage per photon.
It contributes to sunburn, ageing skin, and skin cancer through oxidative injury (cell damage from free radicals).
UVA stimulates epidermal melanin oxidisation (immediate tanning) and melanin production (delayed tanning), which protect the skin by absorbing UVR within the epidermis.
Ultraviolet B radiation
UV-B is medium wavelength UVR (wavelength: 280–315 nm).
Most solar UVB is filtered by the atmosphere.
It penetrates into an individual's epidermis but not into their dermis.
UV-B has high energy and damages epidermal cell DNA.
It stimulates melanin production.
UV-B is the main cause of sunburn and some forms of skin cancer.
Ultraviolet C radiation
Ultraviolet C radiation (UVC) is short-wavelength UVR (wavelength: < 280 nm).
Solar UV-C is completely absorbed by the atmosphere and doesn’t reach the Earth’s surface.
UV-C can be emitted by artificial sources of UVR (eg, by welding arcs and mercury vapour lamps).
Although shorter UVR wavelengths do not penetrate through the skin, UV-C has higher energy than UVB and injures the skin surface.
Exposure to UV-C can lead to severe but superficial sunburn.
Electromagnetic spectrum of visible and ultraviolet radiation and biological effects on the skin
The Ultraviolet Index (UVI) is a measure of the strength of UVR causing erythema (sunburn). If the UVI is > 10, the UVR is extreme, and if it is < 3, it is low.
Factors that result in greater exposure to ultraviolet radiation
The UVI is higher and UVR is more intense closer to the equator compared to the UVI and UVR at longer latitudes, as the sun is overhead so the distance to reach the Earth is shorter. UVR levels are also greater:
During the summer months and during the middle of the day, when the angle of the sun is the smallest
At higher altitude, when the atmosphere is thinner
On a clear day, compared to a cloudy day or where the atmosphere is polluted
Around reflective surfaces, such as snow, sand, grass, or water
In the Southern Hemisphere compared to the Northern Hemisphere, as there is less separation between the sun and the Earth:
Relative to the Northern Hemisphere, New Zealand is exposed to 40% higher peak UVI at commensurate latitudes
If the ozone layer is depleted.
The National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA Taihoro Nukurangi) Lauder ozone measurements taken at Lauder in Central Otago show seasonal and annual climatological variability. Ozone column amounts are measured in Dobson units (DU), where 1 DU = 2.69 x 1016 molecules/cm2.
Ozone variation in 2016 in Lauder, New Zealand
What is the ozone layer?
Ozone is a trace gas that forms the ozone layer within the stratosphere, which is part of the atmosphere around the Earth.
There are three molecules of ozone for every 10 million molecules of air.
Ozone is a highly reactive molecule that contains three oxygen atoms.
Ozone absorbs solar UVR, which heats the atmosphere.
Ozone also shields the Earth from the biologically harmful effects of UVR.
Reduced ozone leads to higher levels of UVR on the Earth’s surface.
The ozone hole and the Montreal Protocol
Ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs; also known as Freons) and Halons, once used in refrigerators, spray cans, and fire extinguishers, have reduced the amount of ozone in the stratosphere.
When CFCs reach the upper atmosphere, they are exposed to UVR, which causes them to break down and form chlorine gas. Chlorine reacts with the oxygen atoms in ozone and rips apart the ozone molecule.
Over 50% of the ozone in the Antarctic stratosphere has been depleted, leading to the formation of the springtime ‘ozone hole’. During summer, ozone-depleted air from the ozone hole can drift over to South America and New Zealand, resulting in higher levels of UVR than usual for the latitude.
Higher winter UVR levels in Australia were seen in the 1990s compared with the 1970s, resulting in predictions that the incidence of UVR-related skin cancer will rise due to depleted ozone levels.
The ‘Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer’ was signed in 1987. It is an international environmental agreement to protect the ozone layer by reducing the production and usage of ODSs such as CFCs. Since its initiation, the atmospheric levels of ODSs have significantly decreased and the stratospheric ozone is expected to fully recover by the year 2050.
How does ultraviolet radiation affect the skin?
UVA induces oxidative damage to the DNA in the presence of melanin.
UVB causes damage independently of independent of melanin and directly affects DNA.
DNA damage also causes the loss of structural integrity in the skin and photo-ageing.
The accumulation of unrepaired DNA and UVR induced immunosuppression, increase the risk of mutations and the development of skin cancer.
Protective mechanisms
Tanning is due to a series of complex steps that are triggered by UVR induced damage to DNA and other components of the skin.
The thickness of the epidermis is increased in response to growth factors released by injured keratinocytes.
The chronically sun-exposed skin of a bald scalp or face, neck, and hands has unique characteristics compared to skin that has not been exposed to UVR.
Photo-aged skin is thinner than non-sun-exposed skin in the same individual.
Photo-aged skin is dryer. Over time, actinic keratoses appear in the most sun-exposed skin sites; these are tender, red, scaly papules and plaques.
Sun-damaged skin is less elastic than skin in other areas and develops a dull yellowish hue due to solar elastosis.
Photo-aged skin has more variable pigmentation than other sites due to freckles, solar lentigines, and hypopigmented and scarred areas. There are often prominent blood vessels (telangiectasia).
The role of ultraviolet radiation in the development of skin cancer
UVR is a major carcinogen. It damages the skin by producing reactive oxygen species (free radicals) that damage proteins, lipids, RNA and DNA. According to the two-hit model, where cancer is a result of accumulation mutations to the DNA, the development of skin cancer depends on an individual’s genetic makeup (particularly their MC1R signalling polymorphisms — that determine skin and hair colour and sun sensitivity) plus two factors.
UVR causes tumour initiation through mutations in DNA.
UVR is a tumour promoter and causes progressive tumour growth.
The incidence of melanoma is high in fair-skinned populations living close to the equator and is higher in Australia and New Zealand compared to the UK and Canada where levels of UVR are lower.
In older adults, melanoma mainly affects the patient's head and neck and is associated with chronic exposure to UVR.
In younger people, melanoma affects the patient's trunk and extremities, especially in people with many melanocytic naevi (moles). This is thought to be due to earlier exposure to UVR, resulting in sunburns.
Non-melanoma skin cancer
The highest annual incidence of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is in Australia and the lowest is in Africa.
SCC and BCC are more common in fair skin (Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I, II and III) than in­ darker skin (types IV, V and VI). (See SCC in skin of colour and BCC in skin of colour.)
Actinic keratoses and SCCs are associated with cumulative sun exposure.
BCCs are the result of intermittent UVR exposure and sunburn.
Skin cancer in sun-exposed sites is more prevalent in patients that are immune suppressed, particularly organ transplant recipients.
Most BCCs and SCCs in sun-exposed skin carry ‘UVR signature’ mutations (ie, cytosine to tyrosine transitions at cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers) in tumour suppressor genes (PTCH1 and p53 respectively).
Skin cancers are more common in people with inherited photosensitivity disorders. These disorders include:
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Oculocutaneous albinism
Rothmund Thomson syndrome.
UVR exposure also increases the risk of:
Merkel cell carcinoma
Atypical fibroxanthoma
Other rarer skin cancers.
Skin cancers due to exposure to ultraviolet radiation
Superficial spreading melanoma Squamous cell carcinoma of lip Basal cell carcinoma
How does ultraviolet radiation affect the eyes?
The eyes are partially protected from sunlight by the brow ridges. Before reaching the retina, reflected UVR is filtered by the cornea, melanin in the iris, aqueous humour, and the lens. UVR causes oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA in the macular part of the neural retina and the retinal pigment epithelium. UVR can also promote inflammatory cytokines and transcription factors within the eye.
Exposure to solar UVR is associated with:
Photokeratitis and photoconjunctivitis
Cataract, especially cortical cataract
Age-related macular degeneration
BCC — responsible for > 90% of eyelid malignancies
SCC — the most common malignancy affecting the cornea and conjunctiva
Melanoma — the most common primary intraocular malignancy.
How does ultraviolet radiation affect the immune system?
Photons of UVR are absorbed by chromophores (atoms that generate colour on a compound) in the epidermis and dermis, triggering an immune response.
UVR promotes the individual's innate immune response by generating antimicrobial peptides in the epidermis. These peptides protect against pathogens and help with cell growth and repair.
UVR, especially UVB, induces the production of platelet-activating factor, prostaglandin E2, histamine, and tumour necrosis factor alpha; these cytokines generate a life-long population of suppressor T cells and induce neutrophil-mediated inflammation.
UVB leads to the synthesis of vitamin D, which can also affect immune function.
Photosensitive skin conditions arising from the failure of the normal immune response include:
Polymorphic light eruption
Chronic photosensitivity dermatitis
Photoaggravated disorders (eg, cutaneous lupus erythematosus).
Photosensitivity disorders
Other immune-related conditions associated with ultraviolet radiation
People who live at latitudes close to the equator where there is higher UVB have an increased risk of developing atopic asthma. Conversely, they have a lower risk of non-atopic asthma.
UVR suppresses the acquired immune response to microbial infections. It reduces the protective efficacy of vaccinations. UVR related immunosuppression may reactivate some latent infections and convert asymptomatic infections to symptomatic infections. It can also boost the oncogenic properties of microbes, such as human papillomavirus.
Beneficial effects of ultraviolet radiation
The beneficial effects of UVR include:
Synthesis of vitamin D2 and D3 in the skin.
Reduction in cardiac mortality — this may be due to vitamin D synthesis or to lower blood pressure and serum cholesterol.
Protection against some autoimmune diseases (eg, multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis).
Reduction in risk of infections (eg, tuberculosis, including cutaneous tuberculosis and viral respiratory tract infections).
Improved well-being and reduced risk of depression — one theory relates this to increased production and expression of beta-endorphin in keratinocytes.
Maintenance of healthy circadian cycles through the suppression of melatonin produced by the pineal gland, so reducing the risk of seasonal affective disorder (SAD).
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA Taihoro Nukurangi). UV and ozone. Available from:  (accessed 12 November 2017).
Velders GJM, Anderson SO, Daniel JS, Fahey DW, McFarland M. The importance of the Montreal Protocol in protecting climate. PNAS 2007; 104: 4814–19, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0610328104. Journal
United States Environmental Protection Agency. International treaties and cooperation. Available from: www.epa.gov/ozone-layer-protection/international-treaties-and-cooperation (accessed 10 November 2017)
van Dijk A, Slaper H, den Outer PN, et al. Skin cancer risks avoided by the Montreal Protocol —worldwide modeling integrating coupled climate-chemistry models with a risk model for UV. Photochem Photobiol. 2013; 89: 234–46. Available from: DOI:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2012.01223.x. PubMed.
Lemus-Deschamps L, Makin JK. Fifty years of changes in UV Index and implications for skin cancer in Australia. Int J Biometerorol 2011; 56: 727–35. Available from: DOI 10.1007/s00484-011-0474-x [Accessed 10/11/2017]. PubMed.
Lucas RM, Norval M, Neale RE, et al. The consequences for human health of stratospheric ozone depletion in association with other environmental factors. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2015; 14: 53-87. Available from: DOI: 10.1039/c4pp90033b. Journal.
Holick MF. Biological effects of sunlight, ultraviolet radiation, visible light, infrared radiation and vitamin D for health. Anticancer Res 2016; 36: 1345–56. PubMed.
Schuch AP, Morenob NC, Schuch NJ, Menck CFN, Garcia CCM. Sunlight damage to cellular DNA: Focus on oxidatively generated lesions. Free Radic Biol Med 2017; 107: 110–24. PubMed
Pinault L, Bushnik T, Fioletov V, Peters CE, King WD, Tjepkema M. The risk of melanoma associated with ambient summer ultraviolet radiation. Health Reports. 2017; 28(5): 3–11. PubMed
D’Orazio J, Jarrett S, Amaro-Ortiz A, Scott T. UV radiation and the skin. Int J Mol Sci 2013; 14: 12222–48. DOI:10.3390/ijms140612222. Journal.
Ozone Secretariat, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The Montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer. Available at: (accessed January 2018).
Genetics of basal cell carcinoma
Global Solar Ultraviolet Index
The impact of climate change on skin
UV and ozone — NZ National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA Taihoro Nukurangi)
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Upadacitinib]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/upadacitinib]
Upadacitinib — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Upadacitinib — extra information
Last Reviewed: July, 2025
Author(s): Nancy Huang (MBChB), DermNet Medical Writer, New Zealand (2025); Dr Cindy Lam, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia (2023)Peer reviewed by: Dr Vidette Wong, Specialist doctor, United Kingdom (2025)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson (2025)Edited by the DermNet content department
Contraindications and precautions
Side effects and risks
What is upadacitinib?
Upadacitinib (RINVOQ®) is an oral, second-generation selective Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor used for atopic dermatitis (eczema). It targets the JAK1 enzyme and modulates the immune response.
Upadacitinib was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in January 2022 for the treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. Upadacitinib has since received approval for this indication by other regulatory bodies, including the MHRA (UK), TGA (Australia), and Medsafe (NZ).
Severe atopic dermatitis unresponsive to topical therapies, phototherapy, and methotrexate - candidate for a JAK inhibitor
What is upadacitinib used for?
In dermatology, upadacitinib is used for adults and adolescents (12 years and older) with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis who are candidates for systemic therapy.
It can be used as monotherapy or in combination with topical steroids.
Clinical trials showed ≥75% improvement in the Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) score from baseline to week 16.
Off-label dermatological uses include:
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Dermatological uses described in small studies include:
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Epidermolysis bullosa pruriginosa
Keratosis lichenoides chronica (Nekam disease).
Other licensed uses:
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease
Giant cell arteritis.
What are the contraindications and precautions with upadacitinib?
Hypersensitivity to upadacitinib or its excipients
Lymphopenia, neutropenia, or anaemia: absolute lymphocyte count <0.5 × 109/L; absolute neutrophil count <1 × 109/L; haemoglobin concentration <80 g/L
Active and serious infections (eg, active tuberculosis, hepatitis B, hepatitis C)
Concurrent use of other immunomodulating agents such as other Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, biologics (eg, adalimumab, etanercept, rituximab), or potent immunosuppressants (eg, azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus) — risk of additive immunosuppression; lack of safety data
Pregnancy and breastfeeding — lack of safety data
Severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C) — lack of safety data
End stage renal disease (eGFR <15mL/min/1.73m2) - lack of safety data.
Patients with risk factors for arterial or venous thrombosis (eg, past history of thromboembolism, obesity, prolonged immobilisation)
Elderly patients (age ≥65)
Paediatric populations
Severe renal impairment (eGFR 15-30mL/min/1.73m2)
Mild to moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A or B) — requires dose adjustment if used for ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease
Co-administration with other CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin) or CYP3A4 inducers (eg, rifampicin, phenytoin)
Past or current malignancy risk factors for gastrointestinal perforation eg, history of diverticulitis, concurrent use of NSAIDs or corticosteroids
For females of reproductive potential, ensure effective contraception is used during treatment and for at least 4 weeks after cessation.
As with other JAK inhibitors, ensure vaccination status is updated prior to commencing upadacitinib, including vaccination for herpes zoster (recombinant zoster vaccine).
Live vaccinations should not be given during or just before starting treatment. Live vaccines include measles-mumps-rubella (MMR), typhoid, bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG), yellow fever, varicella zoster, rotavirus, and Japanese encephalitis.
See: Immunisation in immunosuppressed dermatology patients.
Upadacitinib is available as 15 mg modified-release oral tablets. Tablets can be taken with or without food and should be swallowed whole.
In adults and adolescents (≥12 years old and weighing ≥40 kg), the dosing for the treatment of atopic dermatitis is 15 mg once daily. If response is inadequate, consider increasing the dose to 30 mg once daily.
If elderly (age ≥65), or with severe renal impairment (eGFR 15-30mL/min/1.73m2), or taking a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor (eg, ketoconazole, clarithromycin) the maximum dose is 15 mg once daily.
Pre-treatment screening
Latent tuberculosis (tuberculosis infection) screening with interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) and/or tuberculin skin test (TST). If positive:
Treat prior to initiating upadacitinib
Test for active tuberculosis (chest x-ray and sputum samples, mycobacterium culture, and nucleic acid amplification tests).
Hepatitis B and C screening
Complete/full blood count (CBC/FBC)
Serum electrolytes, creatinine, urea, and eGFR to assess kidney function
Liver function tests
Pregnancy test if relevant
Routine FBC, liver enzymes, and lipid studies (12 weeks after initiation)
Routine skin examinations are recommended for patients with skin cancer risk factors due to an increased risk of non-melanoma skin cancers
Signs and symptoms of infection during and after treatment.
Treatment should be ceased if:
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <1 x 109 cells/L, lymphocytes <0.5 x 109 cells/L
Serious or opportunistic infection develops (eg, reactivation of herpes zoster, viral hepatitis, tuberculosis, cryptococcus). Upadacitinib may be resumed once the infection is controlled.
What are the benefits of upadacitinib?
Rapid onset of action
High level of skin clearance, itch improvement, and improved quality of life in patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis
What are the disadvantages of upadacitinib?
Need to consider multiple drug interactions
Careful monitoring with routine blood tests required during treatment
Risk of serious infections
Not safe in pregnancy or breastfeeding
Immunisations with live vaccines should not be given during or just before starting treatment
What are the side effects and risks of upadacitinib?
Upadacitinib is generally well tolerated with a favourable benefit-risk profile.
Common side effects:
Mild to moderate acne — one of the most common side effects
Upper respiratory tract infections (eg, sinusitis, pharyngitis, tonsillitis)
Hypercholesterolaemia
Herpes simplex infection
Uncommon side effects:
Increased liver enzymes
Increased creatinine kinase
Viral reactivation (eg, herpes zoster, hepatitis)
Serious and/or opportunistic infections.
Gastrointestinal perforation
Malignancy (data in clinical trials are limited; ongoing long-term studies):
Increased risk of lymphoma in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
Non-melanoma skin cancer observed in patients treated with upadacitinib.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Blauvelt A, Teixeira HD, Simpson EL, et al. Efficacy and safety of Upadacitinib vs dupilumab in adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. JAMA Dermatology. 2021;157(9):1047. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2021.3023. Journal
Guttman-Yassky E, Teixeira HD, Simpson EL, et al. Once-daily upadacitinib versus placebo in adolescents and adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis (measure up 1 and measure up 2): Results from two replicate double-blind, randomised controlled phase 3 trials. The Lancet. 2021;397(10290):2151–68. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(21)00588-2. Journal
Mendes-Bastos P, Ladizinski B, Guttman-Yassky E, et al. Characterization of acne associated with upadacitinib treatment in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: A post hoc integrated analysis of 3 phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;87(4):784–791. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2022.06.012. Journal
Reich K, Teixeira HD, de Bruin-Weller M, et al. Safety and efficacy of upadacitinib in combination with topical corticosteroids in adolescents and adults with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis (ad up): Results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. The Lancet. 2021;397(10290):2169–2181. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(21)00589-4. Journal
Silverberg JI, de Bruin-Weller M, Bieber T, et al. Upadacitinib plus topical corticosteroids in atopic dermatitis: Week 52 AD up study results. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2022;149(3). doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.07.036. Journal
Simpson EL, Papp KA, Blauvelt A, et al. Efficacy and safety of upadacitinib in patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. JAMA Dermatology. 2022;158(4):404. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0029. Journal
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Treatment of atopic dermatitis
Janus kinase inhibitors
Immunisation in immunosuppressed dermatology patients
RINVOQ® (upadacitinib) product information
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Uraemic Pruritus]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/uraemic-pruritus]
Uraemic Pruritus (Renal Itch) - DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Uraemic pruritus — extra information
Chronic kidney disease associated pruritus
707151000, 714152005
Authors: Dr Nicholas Van Rooij, MD, Dermatology PHO, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Australia. March 2022. Dr Ritva Vyas, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital New Zealand, 2010. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell.
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is uraemic pruritus?
Uraemic pruritus (uremic pruritus) is also called chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus (CKD-associated pruritus). Uraemia refers to excessive urea in the blood and occurs when the kidneys stop working (renal failure). Pruritus (itch) is a common problem for patients with chronic renal failure or end-stage renal disease.
Uraemic pruritus (renal itch) Uraemic pruritus (renal itch) Pruritus
Who gets uraemic pruritus?
The prevalence rates of uremic pruritus are between 20–50% in those with chronic kidney disease, however, the reported rates appear lower in children at approximately 9%.
Uraemic pruritus is not associated with sex, age, ethnicity, duration of dialysis, or cause of renal failure. Pruritus does not arise when uraemia is due to acute renal failure.
What causes uraemic pruritus?
Uraemic pruritus is thought to be due to a combination of factors including:
Abnormal metabolism of calcium and phosphorus / raised parathyroid hormone
Abnormal magnesium and aluminium concentrations
Accumulation of toxins
Sprouting of new nerves
Systemic inflammation
Co-existing systemic diseases, particularly diabetes and liver disease
Suboptimal dialysis regime.
Some patients develop acquired reactive perforating collagenosis.
What are the clinical features of uraemic pruritus?
Itch in uremic pruritus most commonly affects the back, however, it can also involve the arms, head, and abdomen. Generalized pruritus is also noted in a proportion of affected patients (20-50%).
Other characteristic features include:
Itch becoming worse at night, often resulting in disruption of sleep
Exacerbation of itch with heat and stress
Relief of itch with physical activity, cooler temperatures, and hot or cold showers
Fluctuation of symptoms during haemodialysis sessions.
Uraemic pruritus can be associated with several non-specific cutaneous features resulting from repetitive scratching.
Excoriations and dry skin (xerosis)
Lichen simplex chronicus
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Clinical presentation remains consistent across different skin types and ethnicities.
What are the complications of uraemic pruritus?
Scratching may lead to impetigo (skin infection), prurigo (papules) and chronic, lichenified dermatitis/eczema.
How is uraemic pruritus diagnosed?
Uraemic pruritus is largely a clinical diagnosis, based on a history of chronic kidney disease and onset of symptoms. The commencement of pruritus in patients coinciding with commencement of dialysis, persistence of symptoms, or elevated urea blood levels is consistent with a diagnosis of uraemic pruritus.
Laboratory investigations can help to confirm a diagnosis, investigations may include:
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Phosphate, calcium, and magnesium levels.
Other dermatological and general metabolic causes of itch may need to be excluded e.g. eczema, scabies, drug-induced reactions, iron deficiency, and thyroid disease.
What is the differential diagnosis for uraemic pruritus?
Drug-induced pruritus
Pruritus of cholestasis
Paraneoplastic pruritus
Psychogenic pruritus
What is the treatment for uraemic pruritus?
The first step in treatment is optimising dialysis efficacy. It is also important to attempt to reduce serum parathyroid hormone in order to normalise calcium/phosphorus levels. These methods aim to reduce the underlying cause of itch.
Supportive general measures to improve symptoms include:
Regular use of non-soap cleansers and applying emollients, such as cetomacrogol + glycerol or petrolatum several times daily
Avoiding scratching and keep fingernails short and clean
Avoiding triggers such as heat and stress.
Topical preparations for itch are generally sufficient to help improve symptoms, these may include:
Menthol cream, which provides a cooling sensation to the skin providing relief
Capsaicin, a compound derived from chillies thought to disrupt the itch signal in nerves, but applicable to limited areas only.
UVB phototherapy is the mainstay of treatment for severe uraemic pruritus that has not responded to conventional treatments.
Kappa opioid receptor (KOR) agonists
Difelikefalin received FDA approval in 2021 for the treatment of uraemic pruritus in patients undergoing haemodialysis. Nalfurafine, another KOR agonist, has been approved in Japan since 2009 for this indication.
Other treatments that have been reported to help some individuals, include:
Gabapentin and pregabalin in small doses (e.g. 100–300 mg gabapentin, three times weekly)
Oral antihistamines and systemic steroids are generally not effective.
What is the outcome for uraemic pruritus?
Uraemic pruritus can be difficult to alleviate and patients with pruritus often have decreased quality of life such as poor sleep and depression. In cohort studies, it is associated as an independent predictor of morbidity, mortality, and leads to other poor patient outcomes. One study showed moderate to severe pruritus was associated with a 17% increase in mortality rate.
Kidney transplantation is the definitive treatment and usually results in resolution of uraemic pruritus.
Eusebio-Alpapara KMV, Castillo RL, Dofitas BL. Gabapentin for uremic pruritus: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Dermatol. 2020;59(4):412–22. doi:10.1111/ijd.14708. PubMed
Fishbane S, Jamal A, Munera C, Wen W, Menzaghi F; KALM-1 Trial Investigators. A Phase 3 Trial of Difelikefalin in Hemodialysis Patients with Pruritus. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(3):222–32. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1912770. Journal
Manenti L, Tansinda P, Vaglio A. Uraemic pruritus: clinical characteristics, pathophysiology and treatment. Drugs. 2009;69(3):251–63. doi:10.2165/00003495-200969030-00002. Journal
Silverberg J.I., Brieva J. A successful case of dupilumab treatment for severe uremic pruritus. JAAD Case Reports 2019; 5(4):339–41. Journal
Swarna SS, Aziz K, Zubair T, Qadir N, Khan M. Pruritus Associated With Chronic Kidney Disease: A Comprehensive Literature Review. Cureus. 2019;11(7):e5256. Published 2019 Jul 28. doi:10.7759/cureus.5256. PubMed Central
Acquired perforating collagenosis
Chronic pruritus of unknown origin
The differential diagnosis of itchy skin
Chronic kidney disease — Medline Plus
Dermatologic Manifestations of Renal Disease — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Pruritus and Systemic Disease — Medscape Drugs & Diseases
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urea]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urea]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Urea — extra information
Carbamide, Carbonyldiamide
387092000, 48279009, 771812008, 292622004
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2005.
Urea is naturally present in healthy skin. It is one of three natural moisturising factors in the outer horny layer of our skin. The other two natural moisturising factors are lactic acid and amino acids. There are markedly reduced amounts of urea in dry skin conditions.
Topical preparations of synthetically manufactured urea, either alone or in combination with other medicines, can be particularly useful in treating scaly and itchy dry skin conditions including:
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Urea is also known as carbamide.
Urea preparations are emollients that are essential in the management of dry skin conditions. Emollients moisturise dry skin by reducing water loss from the epidermis (upper layer of skin) resulting in softer and more supple skin.
The specific actions of urea include:
Hydrating effects — urea is strongly hygroscopic (water-loving) and draws and retains water within skin cells
Keratolytic effects — urea softens the horny layer so it can be easily released from the surface of the skin
Regenerative skin protection — urea has a direct protective effect against drying influences and if used regularly improves the capacity of the epidermal barriers for regeneration
Irritation-soothing effects — urea has anti-pruritic activity based on local anaesthetic effects
Penetration-assisting effects — urea can increase the penetration of other substances such as corticosteroids, as it increases skin hydration
Urea preparations come in several forms and strengths. Available dosage forms include cream, lotion, shampoo, gel and shower/bath washes. Strengths of urea preparations range from 3–40%. The form and strength chosen depend on the condition that is being treated and the severity of the condition.
The most commonly used urea preparation in New Zealand is a 10% cream. The cream helps urea to retain water for longer in the stratum corneum and prevents water loss by slowing down evaporation. Urea 40% aqueous solution can be made up by a pharmacist and has been used for the treatment of black hairy tongues, acne conglobata, and to dissolve and remove diseased nails (medical nail avulsion).
Most urea preparations are available from your pharmacy. Higher strength preparations and preparations that contain other active ingredients, such as corticosteroids (hydrocortisone), may only be available on a doctor's prescription.
How to use urea preparations
Urea preparations are for external use only.
Do not use on broken (cracked or bleeding) skin or on any area that is infected or oozing, or where there is severe widespread reddening of the skin.
Urea preparations may be used in children from 1 year and upwards if there is a diagnosed dry skin condition and it has been recommended by the doctor.
For non-diagnosed conditions (normal-dry skin), low strength urea preparations may be used from 3 years of age and upwards.
What are the side effects of urea preparations?
Urea preparations are usually well tolerated. Side effects that may occur include mild stinging, itching and skin rash. These usually do not require medical attention unless they continue and become bothersome.
On DermNetScaly skin diseases
Emollients and moisturisers
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Medical nail avulsion
Other websitesConsumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements — MedlinePlus
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urticaria An Overview]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urticaria-an-overview]
Urticaria (Hives): a complete overview — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Urticaria – an overview
Urticaria – an overview — extra information
Hives, urticaria, Urticaria - an overview
L50, T78.3, L50.1, L50.9, L50.8, L50.3, L50.5, L50.2, L50.6, L56.3, L28.2, D47. 01, Q82.2, L61.1, M31.8, M04.2, T80.6, D89.49, L50.0, T39.015, T80.69XA, L25.8, T78.2, T80.5, L50.4, D84.1
EB05, 4A00.15, EB04, EB00, EB00.0, EB00.1, ME62.2, ME63.1, EB01, EB01.0, EB03.0, EB01.1, EB01.Y, EB01.3, EK10, EK10.1, EK01.2, EK50.02, EK50.00, 2A21.10, NE61, PB36, EF40.10, 4A44.91, 4A60.1, EB03, NE80.3, 4A85.03, 4A85.21, PH44, NE60, 4A84.Y, 4A84.Z, 4A4Z, 4A00.14
126485001, 404177007, 41291007, 247472004, 402383003, 42265009, 402408009, 302161006, 51611005, 302162004, 402601007, 7632005, 73098005, 302165002, 74774004, 201261003, 62211002, 19364004, 402305008, 402304007, 89870006, 10347006, 387788000, 55608001, 78745000, 83227006, 718217000, 402656007, 239945009, 402855009, 403510002, 238687000, 724593005, 402414002, 302972002, 238697009, 213325008, 403608009, 273408008, 6445007, 402403000, 402384009, 40178009, 241957001, 241958006, 241959003, 241960008
Urticaria – an overview
Author and DermNet Editor-in-Chief: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Updated January 2015. DermNet Revision April 2021
Differential diagnosis
Urticaria is characterised by very itchy weals (hives), with or without surrounding erythematous flares. The name urticaria is derived from the common European stinging nettle Urtica dioica. Urticaria can be acute or chronic, spontaneous or inducible.
A weal (or wheal) is a superficial skin-coloured or pale skin swelling, usually surrounded by erythema that lasts anything from a few minutes to 24 hours.
Urticaria can co-exist with angioedema which is a deeper swelling within the skin or mucous membranes.
Urticaria Spontaneous urticaria Wheal in dark skin
Classification of urticaria
Urticaria is classified according to its duration.
Acute urticaria (< 6 weeks duration, and often gone within hours to days)
Chronic urticaria (> 6 weeks duration, with daily or episodic weals)
Chronic urticaria may be spontaneous or inducible. Both types may co-exist.
Figure 1 - Classification of urticaria
Chronic inducible urticaria includes:
Cholinergic urticaria
Delayed pressure urticaria
Vibratory angioedema
Urticaria and angioedema
Who gets urticaria and why?
One in five children or adults has an episode of acute urticaria during their lifetime. It affects all races and both sexes.
Acute urticaria can occur in newborns and infants but is uncommon. Acute urticaria in children is usually caused by infection, even if afebrile. In older children food, medication, and inhaled allergens are also important causes. In adults urticaria is usually idiopathic and spontaneous.
Acute urticaria with fever can be the first sign of COVID-19 infection.
Chronic spontaneous urticaria affects 0.5–2% of the population; in some series, two-thirds are women. Chronic inducible urticaria is however more common. There are genetic and autoimmune associations.
What are the clinical features of urticaria?
Urticarial weals can be a few millimetres or several centimetres in diameter, coloured white or red, with or without a red flare. Each weal may last a few minutes or several hours and may change shape. Weals may be round, or form rings, a map-like pattern, or giant patches.
Urticaria can affect any site of the body and tends to be distributed widely.
Angioedema is more often localised. It commonly affects the face (especially eyelids and perioral sites), hands, feet, and genitalia. It may involve tongue, uvula, soft palate, or larynx.
Serum sickness due to blood transfusion and serum sickness-like reactions due to certain drugs cause acute urticaria leaving bruises, fever, swollen lymph glands, joint pain and swelling.
Linear in dermographism
Tiny in cholinergic urticaria
Diffuse in cold urticaria—if large areas of skin are affected, they can lead to fainting (potentially dangerous if swimming in cold water).
The weals are more persistent in chronic spontaneous urticaria, but each individual lesion will resolve within 24 hours. They may occur at certain times of the day.
Urticaria severity assessment
Visual analogue scales can be used to record and compare the degree of itch.
The activity of chronic spontaneous urticaria can be assessed using the UAS7 scoring system. The daily weal/itch scores are added up for seven days; the maximum score is 42.
The emotional impact of urticaria and its effect on quality of life should also be assessed. The Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) and CU-Q2oL, a specific questionnaire for chronic urticaria, have been validated for chronic urticaria, where sleep disruption is a particular problem.
What causes urticaria?
Weals are due to release of chemical mediators from tissue mast cells and circulating basophils. These chemical mediators include histamine, platelet-activating factor and cytokines. The mediators activate sensory nerves and cause dilation of blood vessels and leakage of fluid into surrounding tissues. Bradykinin release causes angioedema.
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain urticaria. The immune, arachidonic acid and coagulation systems are involved, and genetic mutations are under investigation.
Acute urticaria can be induced by the following factors, but the cause is not always identified.
Acute viral infection — upper respiratory infection, viral hepatitis, infectious mononucleosis, mycoplasma
Acute bacterial infection — dental abscess, sinusitis
Food allergy (IgE mediated)—usually milk, egg, peanut, shellfish
Drug allergy (IgE mediated drug-induced urticaria) — often an antibiotic
Drug-induced urticaria due to pseudoallergy — aspirin, nonselective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opiates, radiocontrast media; these cause urticaria without immune activation
Severe allergic urticaria may lead to anaphylactic shock (bronchospasm, collapse).
Immune complexes due to blood transfusion cause serum sickness and certain drugs cause serum sickness-like reactions.
A single episode or recurrent episodes of angioedema without urticaria can be due to an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor drug [see ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema].
Chronic spontaneous urticaria has also been associated with:
Chronic underlying infection, such as Helicobacter pylori (bowel parasites)
Chronic autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, thyroid disease, coeliac disease, vitiligo, and others.
Weals in chronic spontaneous urticaria may be aggravated by:
Drug pseudoallergy—aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opiates
Food pseudoallergy—salicylates, azo dye food colouring agents such as tartrazine (102), benzoate preservatives (210-220), and other food additives.
Inducible urticaria is a response to a physical stimulus.
Type of inducible urticaria
Examples of stimuli inducing wealing
Stroking or scratching the skin
Towel drying after a hot shower
Cold air on exposed skin
Cholinergic urticaria
Sweat induced by exercise
Sweat induced by emotional upset
Eliciting substance absorbed through the skin or mucous membrane
Allergens (IgE-mediated): white flour, cosmetics, textiles, latex, saliva, meat, fish, vegetables
Pseudoallergens or irritants: stinging nettle, [hairy caterpillar, medicines
Delayed pressure urticaria
Pressure on affected skin several hours earlier
Pressure from a seat belt
Standing on a ladder rung
Sun exposure to non-habituated body sites
Often spare face, neck, hands
May involve long wavelength UV or visible light
Fresh, salt, or chlorinated water
Recurrent angioedema without urticaria can be due to inherited or acquired complement C1 esterase deficiency.
How is urticaria diagnosed?
Urticaria is diagnosed in people with a history of weals that last less than 24 hours with or without angioedema. A medication and family history should be elicited. A thorough physical examination should be undertaken.
Skin prick tests and radioallergosorbent tests (RAST) or CAP fluoroimmunoassay may be requested if a drug, latex, or food allergy is suspected in acute urticaria.
There are no routine diagnostic tests in chronic spontaneous urticaria apart from blood count and C-reactive protein (CBC, CRP), but investigations may be undertaken if an underlying disorder is suspected.
The autologous serum skin test is sometimes carried out in chronic spontaneous urticaria, but its value is uncertain. It is positive if an injection of the patient's serum under the skin causes a red weal.
Inducible urticaria is often confirmed by inducing the reaction eg, scratching the skin in dermographism or applying an ice cube in suspected cold urticaria.
Investigations for a systemic condition or autoinflammatory disease should be undertaken in urticaria patients with fever, joint or bone pain, and malaise. Patients with angioedema without weals should be asked if they take ACE inhibitor drugs and tested for complement C4; C1-INH levels, function and antibodies; and C1q.
Biopsy of urticaria can be non-specific. The pathology shows oedema in the dermis and dilated blood vessels, with a variable mixed inflammatory infiltrate. Vessel-wall damage indicates urticarial vasculitis.
What is the treatment for urticaria?
The main treatment of all forms of urticaria in adults and children is with an oral second-generation H1-antihistamine such as cetirizine or loratidine. If the standard dose (eg, 10 mg for cetirizine) is not effective, the dose can be increased up to fourfold (eg, 40 mg cetirizine daily). They are stopped when the acute urticaria has settled down. The addition of a second antihistamine is not thought to be helpful.
Terfenadine and astemizole should not be used, as they are cardiotoxic in combination with ketoconazole or erythromycin. They are no longer available in New Zealand.
Although systemic treatment is best avoided during pregnancy and breastfeeding, there have been no reports that second-generation antihistamines cause birth defects. If treatment is required, loratadine and cetirizine are currently preferred.
Conventional first-generation antihistamines such as promethazine or chlorpheniramine are no longer recommended for urticaria.
Avoidance of trigger factors
Identified triggers should be eliminated if possible (eg, drug or food allergy). Avoidance of relevant type 1 (IgE-mediated) allergens clears urticaria within 48 hours.
Treat identified chronic infections such as H. pylori.
Avoid aspirin, opiates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (paracetamol is generally safe).
Minimise dietary pseudoallergens for a trial period of at least three weeks.
Avoid known allergens that have been confirmed by positive specific IgE/skin prick tests if these have clinical relevance for urticaria.
Cool the affected area with a fan, cold flannel, ice pack, or soothing moisturising lotion.
The physical triggers for inducible urticaria should be minimised; see examples below. However, symptoms often persist.
Symptomatic dermographism: reduce friction eg, avoid tight clothing.
Cold urticaria: dress warmly in cold or windy conditions and avoid swimming in cold water.
Solar urticaria: dress up and apply broad-spectrum sunscreens.
Some patients with inducible urticaria benefit from daily induction of symptoms to induce tolerance. Phototherapy may relieve the itch of symptomatic dermographism.
Treatment of acute refractory urticaria
If non-sedating antihistamines are not effective, a 4 to 5-day course of oral prednisone (prednisolone) may be warranted in severe acute urticaria.
Intramuscular injection of adrenaline (epinephrine) is reserved for life-threatening anaphylaxis or swelling of the throat.
Treatment of chronic refractory urticaria
Patients with chronic urticaria that has failed to respond to maximum-dose second-generation oral antihistamines taken for four weeks should be referred to a dermatologist, immunologist or medical allergy specialist.
There is good evidence to support treatment with omalizumab or ciclosporin, which each have a 65% response rate in antihistamine-resistant patients.
Long-term systemic corticosteroids are not recommended, as high doses are required to reduce symptoms of urticaria and they have inevitable adverse effects that can be serious.
The effectiveness of treatment can be objectively monitored using urticaria control test. Patients are asked to score the physical symptoms of urticaria they have experienced in the previous four weeks, quality of life affected by urticaria, how often treatment was not enough to control symptoms, and overall control of urticaria.
What is the differential diagnosis of urticaria?
Scombroid fish poisoning
Urticarial vasculitis
Autoinflammatory syndromes
What is the outlook for chronic urticaria?
Cicardi M, Aberer W, Banerji A, et al. Classification, diagnosis, and approach to treatment for angioedema: consensus report from the Hereditary Angioedema International Working Group. Allergy. 2014;69(5):602–16. doi:10.1111/all.12380. PubMed
Grattan CE, Humphreys F; British Association of Dermatologists Therapy Guidelines and Audit Subcommittee. Guidelines for evaluation and management of urticaria in adults and children. Br J Dermatol. 2007;157(6):1116–23. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2007.08283.x. PubMed
Greenberger PA. Chronic urticaria: new management options. World Allergy Organ J. 2014;7(1):31. doi:10.1186/1939-4551-7-31. Journal
Jáuregui I, Ortiz de Frutos FJ, Ferrer M, et al. Assessment of severity and quality of life in chronic urticaria. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2014;24(2):80–6. PubMed Central
Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh HJ, et al. Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria [published correction appears in N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 13;368(24):2340–1]. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(10):924–35. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1215372. PubMed
Radonjic-Hoesli S, Hofmeier KS, Micaletto S, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Bircher A, Simon D. Urticaria and angioedema: an update on classification and pathogenesis. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2018;54(1):88–101. doi:10.1007/s12016-017-8628-1. PubMed
Techasatian L, Phungoen P, Chaiyarit J, Uppala R. Etiological and predictive factors of pediatric urticaria in an emergency context. BMC Pediatr. 2021;21(1):92. doi:10.1186/s12887-021-02553-y. Journal
Chronic spontaneous urticaria
Chronic inducible urticaria
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Drug-induced urticaria
Cholinergic urticaria
Vibratory angioedema
Serum sickness-like reactions
Dermatological emergencies online course
Autologous skin testing
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis
Medscape Reference Dermatology
Urticaria and Angioedema — British Association of Dermatologists
urtikaria.net/ — in German and English. Includes Urticaria Control Test, urticaria calendar and scoring instructions
Hives — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urticaria And Urticaria Like Conditions]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urticaria-and-urticaria-like-conditions]
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions — extra information
L50, T78.3, L50.1, L50.9, L50.8, L50.3, L50.5, L50.2, L50.6, L56.3, L28.2, L12.0, L24, L23, L51, L51.9, L27.0, D47.01, Q82.2,L13.9, O26.86, L53.1, L98.3, L74.8, L61.1, M31.8, L98.2, M04.2
EB05, 4A00.15, EB04, EB00, EB00.0, EB00.1, ME62.2, ME63.1, EB01, EB01.0, EB03.0, EB01.1, EB01.Y, EB01.3, EK10, EK10.1, EK01.2, EK50.0Z, EK50.02, EK50.00, EB41.0, EK0Z, EB12.0, EH61.0, 2A21.20, ME63.3, JA65.12, EB11, EB30, EB2Y, NE61, PB36, EF40.10, EB20, EB2Y, 4A60.1, EB03
126485001, 41291007, 404177007, 247472004, 402383003, 42265009, 402408009, 302161006, 51611005, 302162004, 402601007, 7632005, 73098005, 302165002, 74774004, 201261003, 62211002, 19364004, 19364004, 402305008, 402304007, 89870006, 10347006, 387788000, 402385005, 55608001, 238938000, 110979008, 36715001, 28664002, 89322006, 78745000, 88697005, 200920000, 400009001, 773732005, 238931006, 238754005, 83227006, 718217000, 402656007, 239945009, 402855009, 403510002, 84625002, 402417009, 238687000, 724
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. 2011.
Introduction - diagnoses of urticaria
Introduction - urticaria
Urticaria-like skin lesions
Urticaria associated with systemic disease
This topic provides a differential diagnosis for urticaria and for urticaria-like conditions that resemble urticaria but are not caused by wealing.
Urticaria describes a group of conditions in which there are weals (or weals) in the skin, itchy white or red lumps. Urticaria can occasionally be a sign of systemic disease.
Spontaneous or 'ordinary' urticaria is divided into acute urticaria (lasting a few hours or days or up to six weeks) and chronic urticaria (persisting more than six weeks, and sometimes life-long).
Acute urticaria is self-limiting and often related to infection, and less often due to food or is drug-induced.
Ordinary urticaria may be accompanied by angioedema.
The weals are well defined raised lesions with a smooth surface. They may be red or white, surrounded by a red or white flare. Weals range in size from a few millimetres to many centimetres in diameter. The shape also varies: round, polycyclic (overlapping circles), annular (ring-shaped), geographic (like a map). They are randomly distributed on the body and may affect any site. They last no more than 24 hours and do not leave any marks behind.
Ordinary urticaria: asymmetrical weals that clear within 24 hours
Weals are induced at the site of the provoking factor
Inducible urticaria: short-lasting weals at the site of provoking factor
Dermographism Solar urticaria provoked experimentally Cold urticaria provoked by ice cube
What are urticaria-like skin lesions?
Urticaria-like skin lesions are reddish or skin-coloured flat patches or swellings with a smooth surface that persist for more than 24 hours.
Insect bites often result in itchy bumps (papules) or weals. Their characteristics include:
Initial sting is often felt
Central blister (vesicle)
Groups of lesions, often distributed asymmetrically
More commonly arise in summer and autumn months
Individual lesions persist for days to weeks
Brownish discolouration that persists for months is often seen in a skin that tans easily.
Children and, less frequently, adults may develop papular urticaria, which is interpreted as a hypersensitivity reaction to insect bites. No initial sting is felt, and old lesions may reappear.
A biopsy reveals an inflammatory infiltrate that includes eosinophils and spongiosis of the epidermis.
Insect bites: grouped urticarial lesions with central punctum or blister
Insect bites Insect bites Insect bites
Urticarial dermatitis
Urticarial dermatitis presents with both urticaria-like and eczema-like lesions.
Urticarial dermatitis usually affects elderly patients
Persistent red itchy plaques may have a smooth surface (urticaria-like) or dry scratched surface (eczema-like)
They are distributed symmetrically on the trunk, upper arms and thighs
A biopsy may be reported as dermal dermatitis with mixed inflammatory cells in the dermis and minimal spongiosis in the epidermis.
Urticarial dermatitis can be an early sign of bullous pemphigoid. Eventually, tense blisters appear. Biopsy features eosinophils and subepidermal clefting with positive staining on direct immunofluorescence.
Urticarial dermatitis: persistent red plaques with a smooth or dry surface
Urticarial dermatitis Urticarial dermatitis Urticarial dermatitis
Lesions clear up over days to weeks
Classic erythema multiforme presents with an acute eruption of target-shaped lesions on the hands, feet, knees and elbows. However target-shaped lesions may also be seen in ordinary urticaria.
Target lesions are urticaria-like plaques characterised by concentric rings
In erythema multiforme, blisters often arise in the centre of the plaques
Individual lesions persist for ten days to 3 weeks
Erythema multiforme may be recurrent, usually due to herpes simplex virus infection
A biopsy is usually characteristic.
Erythema multiforme: crops of target lesions on hands and knees
Erythema multiforme Erythema multiforme Erythema multiforme
Urticarial drug eruptions
Drug eruptions include urticaria and urticaria-like eruptions. Individual lesions resolve within hours in drug-induced urticaria and persist for days in urticaria-like eruptions. They are often described as morbilliform or maculopapular eruptions. Characteristics of drug eruptions include:
The rash starts within 14 days of a new medication (except in drug hypersensitivity syndrome, when they arise within eight weeks of starting a new medication)
They arise sooner on re-challenge
The medication may have already been stopped when the rash appears
Red macules (small flat spots) and papules (small raised spots) may merge to form large patches (large flat areas) and plaques (large raised areas)
The rash is symmetrical and tends to be most severe on the trunk
The rash may or may not be itchy
There may or may not be a low-grade fever
As the lesions fade, the surface peels
Dark marks may persist for days to weeks
A biopsy reveals a subtle inflammatory infiltrate that includes eosinophils, and lymphocytes and apoptotic keratinocytes in the epidermis.
Drug eruptions: symmetrical urticated papules and plaques
Drug eruption Drug eruption Drug eruption
Urticaria pigmentosa
Urticaria pigmentosa is a form of cutaneous mastocytosis in which there are brown macules and papules.
Urticaria pigmentosa is mostly seen in infants and improves with age
It may also arise in adults when it tends to persist
Lesions may affect trunk and limbs, and less often scalp and face
The lesions urticate when they are rubbed, or spontaneously, i.e. the papules swell into weals, and these persist for up to an hour
Lesions may blister in young children
There may be few to hundreds of lesions
Systemic involvement may result in flushing and faintness
A biopsy may reveal increased numbers of mast cells, but these can be difficult to identify, and the tissue may look the same as normal skin.
Urticaria pigmentosa: brown spots that urticate
Urticaria pigmentosa: brown spots that urticate
Autoimmune blistering diseases
The subepidermal autoimmune blistering diseases may initially present with urticarial lesions several days or weeks before blisters appear. These urticarial lesions may be seen in:
Pemphigoid gestationis (pemphigoid associated with pregnancy)
Linear IgA bullous dermatosis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
The characteristics of autoimmune blistering diseases include:
Symmetrical distribution
A tendency to involve trunk and skin folds (flexures)
Often affects the elderly (pemphigoid) or pregnant patient (pemphigoid gestationis).
Skin biopsy for routine histopathology and direct immunofluorescence studies are necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
Urticarial plaques in autoimmune blistering diseases
Bullous pemphigoid Bullous pemphigoid Pemphigoid gestationis
Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy
PUPPP or Pruritic Urticarial Papules and Plaques of Pregnancy is an eruption occurring during the last few weeks of pregnancy, usually in a first pregnancy.
Small pink papules may join to form plaques
Urticarial lesions are most common, but eczematous and blistered plaques may also arise
Lesions mostly affect the trunk, upper arms and thighs
The spots usually start in the stretch marks (striae gravidarum)
PUPPP clears up within a few weeks of delivery
PUPPP: symmetrical urticated plaques favouring stretch marks
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy PUPPP PUPPP polymorphous eruption of pregnancy PUPPP polymorphous eruption of pregnancy
Annular erythema: slowly enlarging rings
Annular erythema Annular erythema Annular erythema
Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis
Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis is a rare, recurrent and itchy rash affecting women during their childbearing years.
Skin lesions appear during the second half of the menstrual cycle and resolve during the menstrual period
Urticaria, urticaria-like weals, eczema-like lesions, blisters and target lesions may occur
It is prevented when ovulation is prevented by an oral contraceptive agent
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis is a distinctive pathological entity of an unusual persistent skin eruption often of an urticarial type. Other lesions described with the same pathology include papules, nodules and plaques that are skin coloured, red or brown. These may be oval, annular or cord-like.
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis is associated with autoimmune diseases, particularly seronegative polyarthritis, and is occasionally seen in association with lymphoma, lung cancer, drugs and infections
Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis
Wells syndrome, also called eosinophilic dermatitis, also presents with urticarial lesions. Eosinophils are seen in the blood in 50% of patients.
The lesions may be confined to one site or more generalised
Individual lesions are itchy red to purple, swollen papules or plaques that resolve over days to weeks
They may resemble insect bites or cellulitis
Lesions may be followed by brown marks that last for weeks to months
Blisters may arise within the lesions
Lesions may recur in the same site
Skin biopsy is characterised by eosinophils and flame figures.
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis is a rare condition occurring in patients with acute myelogenous leukaemia, either while on or after receiving chemotherapy.
Solitary or grouped urticaria-like papules and plaques are associated with fever
Skin biopsy reveals neutrophils around the eccrine sweat glands and some destruction of eccrine cells.
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis: irregular urticated plaques with fever in chemotherapy patient
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis
Urticaria – as a feature of a systemic disease
Patients with ordinary urticaria do not usually have systemic symptoms, so if these are present, other diagnoses should be considered.
Scombroid fish poisoning
Sudden onset of a red itchy rash within 30 minutes of consuming decomposing scombroid fish may be due to scombroid fish poisoning in which large amounts of histamine are ingested. Unlike urticaria, there are no weals. Other symptoms include a headache, palpitations, nausea, diarrhoea and collapse.
Scombroid fish poisoning (tuna)
Scombroid rash Scombroid rash
Urticarial vasculitis
Urticarial vasculitis is defined by histology showing small vessel vasculitis on skin biopsy.
Urticarial skin lesions persist for longer than 24 hours
They sting and burn rather than itch
They leave brown marks or bruises behind as they fade
They may be accompanied by purpura and other features of cutaneous vasculitis
It can be a local process, or it can be associated with systemic disease
It may be accompanied by migratory arthritis, heart disease, lung disease, kidney disease, gastrointestinal symptoms and neurological complications.
Associations include systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, infections, inflammatory bowel disease, lymphoma and solid organ cancer.
Hypersensitivity vasculitis, cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa and Churg-Strauss syndrome may also present with urticaria-like lesions.
Urticarial vasculitis: urticarial lesions resolve with bruising
Urticarial vasculitis Urticarial vasculitis Urticarial vasculitis
Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis
Tender urticaria-like plaques may be seen in acute neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet syndrome). The lesions often blister and may affect mucosal surfaces as well as skin surfaces. They are often seen on the neck but may occur on any site. The plaques enlarge and persist for days to weeks. Sweet syndrome results in fever, malaise, arthralgia, and other systemic symptoms.
Sweet syndrome: urticarial plaques are often blistered
Sweet disease Sweet disease Sweet disease
Neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis
Neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis presents with urticarial lesions that are defined by a histological reaction pattern revealing neutrophils lined up between collagen fibres.
Fever and arthritis may accompany the skin lesions
Blood tests reveal raised ESR / CRP and neutrophil leucocytosis (raised white cell count)
Underlying inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis are often present
Unlike acute neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet syndrome), there is no blistering or mucosal involvement
Neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
Neutrophilic dermatosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis Neutrophilic dermatosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis Neutrophilic dermatosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis
Eosinophilic dermatosis of haematological malignancy
Eosinophilic dermatosis of haematological malignancy arises in some forms of leukaemia. The skin lesions may include urticarial plaques.
Autoinflammatory syndromes
The autoinflammatory syndromes are a group of mainly genetic diseases that affect the skin and other organs.
Urticarial wheals, macules and papules may occur
Skin lesions are accompanied by fever and joint disease
Onset is frequently during childhood
The inflammation involves activation of the cytokine, interleukin IL-1beta
An urticated erythema means a rash with raised red patches. This includes many of the conditions described above. When accompanying upper respiratory symptoms, such as a sore throat, fever and malaise, it is often due to the underlying viral infection and is a type of exanthem. An exanthem with flat red patches may also be called toxic erythema.
Peroni A, Colato C, Schena D, Girolomoni G. Urticarial lesions: if not urticaria, what else? The differential diagnosis of urticaria: part I. Cutaneous diseases. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 Apr;62(4):541–55; quiz 555–6. PubMed
Peroni A, Colato C, Zanoni G, Girolomoni G. Urticarial lesions: if not urticaria, what else? The differential diagnosis of urticaria: part II. Systemic diseases. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 Apr;62(4):557–70; quiz 571–2. PubMed
Hannon GR, Wetter DA, Gibson LE. Urticarial dermatitis: Clinical features, diagnostic evaluation, and etiologic associations in a series of 146 patients at Mayo Clinic (2006-2012). J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013 Nov 20. PubMed
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urticaria In Children]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urticaria-in-children]
Urticaria in children
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Urticaria in children
Urticaria in children — extra information
Urticaria in children
Author: Natalie Allen, Medical Student, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. April 2019.
Differential diagnoses
What is urticaria in children?
Urticaria refers to a group of conditions in which weals (hives) or angioedema (swelling) develop in the skin. It is very common in children.
A weal is a superficial swelling, usually pale or skin-coloured. It is often surrounded by an area of erythema and can last from a few minutes to 24 hours. Children will usually complain of itch and sometimes of a burning sensation.
Angioedema is a deeper swelling from within the skin or mucous membranes. It usually looks red and puffy. The most common areas for angioedema in children are the lips, tongue, and eyelids.
How is urticaria in children classified?
Chronic urticaria can be spontaneous (when weals occur without any specific trigger) or inducible (when weals occur with a specific trigger).
Chronic inducible urticaria is classified by the various physical triggers, such as dermographism (stroking or scratching the skin).
Which children get urticaria?
Approximately 15% of all children under 10 years of age will have at least one episode of acute urticaria. The risk is slightly higher for girls than for boys. However, if a child is atopic (has asthma, dermatitis, and allergies), this risk is around 20%.
What causes urticaria in children?
Weals are caused by a number of chemical mediators, such as histamine and cytokines, which are released from inflammatory cells, including mast cells. The mediators cause vasodilation and leakage of fluid into surrounding tissues to produce the redness and swelling of urticarial weals.
Triggers of acute spontaneous urticaria can include:
Bacterial infection, such as sinusitis or a dental abscess
Food allergy, usually on or after the first exposure to a particular food such as egg, milk, soy, peanut, and wheat
Drug-induced urticaria, such as that caused by an antibiotic or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
Chronic urticaria is usually caused by autoimmunity or a chronic underlying infection. It is rare in children.
Inducible urticaria is caused by a direct stimulus, such as dermographism, delayed pressure, cold, heat, sunlight, vibration, or exercise. It is linked with atopy and chronic urticaria, but the pathogenesis is not fully understood.
What are the clinical features of urticaria in children?
Urticarial weals may appear on any part of the body and are often very itchy. They can vary in size from the size of a pinpoint to several centimetres in diameter. They are either white or red and can be either localised or widespread. Weals change shape and size and each one lasts from a few minutes to several hours.
Angioedema is usually localised to a single area such as the hands, feet, and genitalia. It most commonly affects the face in children. The child may have a swollen tongue, eyelids, or lips. Angioedema is often tender or painful.
Urticaria and angioedema in children
Acute urticarial rash in skin of colour Acute urticarial rash in skin of colour Severe lip angioedema
What are the complications of urticaria in children?
Urticaria is usually self-limiting and will go away on its own. However, it can often be very uncomfortable for a child due to the intense itchiness. There are usually no serious long-term consequences for children.
Urticaria may be a component of anaphylaxis (severe allergic response). If the child is also struggling to breathe, wheezing, collapses, or seems unwell, seek urgent medical attention.
How is urticaria in children diagnosed?
Urticaria is usually diagnosed by taking a medical history. Urticaria is characterised by individual weals resolving or changing within 24 hours. The child should be thoroughly examined to detect possible causes.
If a food or drug allergy is suspected, a skin prick test or immunoglobulin E (IgE) tests may occasionally be arranged to investigate further.
What is the differential diagnosis for urticaria in children?
The differential diagnosis for urticaria in children includes a variety of infections and skin conditions.
Insect bites — these present on exposed sites, such as the waistline or ankles, as asymmetrical clusters of itchy papules or weals, often with a central fluid-filled blister. The lesions persist for several days or longer.
Erythema multiforme — erythematous plaques are usually located on acral sites (the hands, arms, feet, legs, or face). Target lesions (a pattern of concentric rings) are characteristic, sometimes with central blistering. Each plaque persists days to weeks.
Urticarial vasculitis — this is uncommon. It resembles urticaria with the exception that for the weals last longer than 24 hours and are followed by bruise-like discolouration.
What is the treatment for urticaria in children?
Urticaria in children is treated with a non-sedating antihistamine, such as cetirizine. This is not curative, but often controls the itch and the spread of weals until the urticaria settles on its own.
Dosage recommendations based on age groups are as follows:
Babies and infants aged under 2 years — 1 mL of cetirizine oral solution per 4 kg twice per daily
Children aged 2–6 years — 2.5 mL of cetirizine oral solution twice daily
Children aged 6–12 years — a 10-mg cetirizine tablet once daily or 10 mL of cetirizine oral solution once daily.
Children may also be advised to avoid triggers such as foods or drugs, cold or heat.
The itch may be reduced by cooling with a fan, ice pack, or moisturising lotion.
If there is life-threatening anaphylaxis, an intramuscular injection of adrenaline is advised.
Saini S. Chronic spontaneous urticaria: Chronic spontaneous urticaria: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, pathogenesis, and natural history. UpToDate. Updated 25 October 2018. Available at: www.uptodate.com/contents/chronic-spontaneous-urticaria-clinical-manifestations-diagnosis-pathogenesis-and-natural-history (accessed 4 April 2019)
Shin M, Lee S. Prevalence and causes of childhood urticaria. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res 2017; 9: 189–90. DOI: 10.4168/aair.2017.9.3.189. PubMed Central
Church MK, Weller K, Stock P, Maurer M. Chronic spontaneous urticaria in children: itching for insight. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2011; 22: 1–8. DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3038.2010.01120. PubMed
New Zealand Medicine Formulary for Children. Cetirizine hydrochloride. April 2019. Available at: (accessed 1 April 2019).
Simons FER; Early Treatment of the Atopic Child (ETAC) Study Group. Prevention of acute urticaria in young children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001; 107: 703–6. DOI: 10.1067/mai.2001.113866. Journal
Urticaria — an overview
Chronic spontaneous urticaria
Chronic inducible urticaria
Drug-induced urticaria
Urticaria — Starship Child Health: Starship clinical guidelines
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Urticarial Vasculitis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urticarial-vasculitis]
Urticarial vasculitis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Urticarial vasculitis
Urticarial vasculitis — extra information
Blood vessel problems
EF40.10, 4A44.91, 4A44.BZ, 4A44.B0
402656007, 239945009, 402855009, 403510002, 718217000
Blood vessel problems
Urticarial vasculitis
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2006. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, January 2016.
What is urticarial vasculitis?
Urticarial vasculitis is a variant of cutaneous small vessel vasculitis. It is characterised by inflamed and reddened patches or weals on the skin that appears to resemble urticaria, but when the skin is examined closely under a microscope, a vasculitis is found (inflamed blood vessels).
Urticarial vasculitis Urticarial vasculitis in skin of colour Urticarial vasculitis
Urticarial vasculitis is generally classified as two types:
Normocomplementaemic urticarial vasculitis
Hypocomplementaemic urticarial vasculitis
These are distinguished by finding normal or lowered levels of complement proteins on blood testing. Although both types may be associated with systemic symptoms such as angioedema, abdominal or chest pain, fever, and joint pain, this is more apparent in the hypocomplementaemic form. This form has also been linked to the connective tissue disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
What causes urticarial vasculitis?
The cause of urticarial vasculitis is unknown, but it has been associated with the following conditions:
Inflammatory connective disorders such as SLE and Sjögren syndrome.
Immunoglobulin disorders such as immunoglobulin A and immunoglobulin M monoclonal gammopathies
Leukaemia and internal cancers
Viral diseases such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C and infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever)
Drug-induced conditions from ACE inhibitors, penicillin, sulfonamides, fluoxetine and thiazides.
What are the clinical features of urticarial vasculitis?
In addition to the skin lesions, patients with urticarial vasculitis may also develop systemic symptoms including photosensitivity, swollen lymph nodes, joint pain (50%), fever, abdominal pain (20%), difficulty breathing, and lung and kidney problems.
How is urticarial vasculitis diagnosed?
A skin biopsy may be performed to confirm urticarial vasculitis. Microscopic findings of early lesions include a neutrophil leukocytoclastic vasculitis, in which there is damage to small vessels in the middle layers of the skin (dermis). In later lesions, a lymphocytic vasculitis may be seen.
Further investigation may find associated diseases. Laboratory studies may include renal function and immunological status. A chest x-ray should be performed in patients with hypocomplementaemia and breathing problems.
What is the treatment for urticarial vasculitis?
Patients with normocomplementaemic urticarial vasculitis usually have minimal or no systemic involvement and lesions often resolve on their own over time.
Treatment is based on the systemic effects of the disease and the extent of cutaneous involvement. Antihistamines or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be used to relieve symptoms.
Treatments that may be used in the long-term control of severe urticarial vasculitis that may be associated with systemic symptoms include:
Indometacin/indomethacin (a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug)
Corticosteroids, such as oral prednisone
Book: Textbook of Dermatology. Ed Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJB, Champion RH, Burton JL. Fourth edition. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Cutaneous vasculitis
Small vessel vasculitis
Exercise-induced vasculitis
Complement deficiencies
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis
Skin signs of rheumatic disease
Urticaria and urticaria-like conditions
Urticarial Vasculitis — Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Useful Resources For A Dermatologist]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/useful-resources-for-a-dermatologist]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Links for dermatology information
Information/education
Information/education
The links on this page may take you outside the DermNet website. DermNet New Zealand does not monitor or endorse any of the information found at these external sites but identifies them only as sources of additional information.
General dermatology and medical information
Continuing medical education
Find a dermatologist
General dermatology and medical information
DermNet's worldwide links for patients
ICD-11 Coding Tool and ICD-11 for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics
Dermwiz searchable differential diagnoses
SYMPTOMA – search engine for diseases
Occupational Dermatology Research and Education Centre
Emedicine dermatology textbook
British National Formulary UK only
New Zealand Formulary. See Chapter 13. Skin. Available to New Zealand health professionals.
Choosing wisely: NZ Dermatological Society recommendations
Immunisation Advisory Centre New Zealand
Therapeutic Goods Administration Australia
MedWatch: FDA Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program
Gendia – Genetic diagnostic tests
Genetic and rare disease network in Western Australia — seeking health professionals and researchers with specialist knowledge in a particular rare and/or genetic disease
Litt's Drug Eruption Database – subscription required
Adverse Drug Reactions Insight – subscription required
VigiAccess – WHO adverse drug reactions database (available free of charge)
European database of suspected drug reaction reports (available free of charge)
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
Clinical Evidence from the BMJ
Dermatologic Disorders – The Merck Manual Professional Edition
Danderm Danish national service on dermato-venereology
Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine UK
Centre for Evidence-Based Dermatology updates
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) UK NHS including Clinical Knowledge Summaries: accessible in UK only
UpToDate (requires subscription)
Manual (pathology tests) Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia
HealthMap – Global health iformation
American Academy of Dermatology Medical Student Core Curriculum
Univadis – MSD's medical reference for New Zealand and Australia
DermRecipes — Pharmacopoeia of dermatological preparations for experienced dermatologists
Mendelian — Rare diseases knowledge base
Dermahighlights — Webinar series for dermatologists
OpenMD — a search engine and directory aimed at improving public access to high quality medical information
Continuing medical education
Derm In-Review Online Practice Exam and Study System
Dermcloud advanced medical dermatology for non-dermatologists: webinars
MDlive.net Dermatology lectures
Australian Dermconsult for dermatology registrars in Australia
Virtual Grand Rounds in Dermatology
Dermpedia Dermatology/dermatopathology wiki
Cleveland Clinic Center for Continuing Education, Dermatology
Medscape Dermatology
Drug Reference search
Drug Interaction Checker
Dermnet Skin Disease Atlas
Dermlive case discussions
Elsevier CME courses: Dermatology
Skin Cancer Courses – University of Queensland
The Skin Cancer College of Australia and New Zealand
HealthCert for courses on skin cancer and dermatology (Australia)
Free online skin cancer training
Master of Science Dermoscopy courses University of Graz
Academic Dermatology courses – Wales
University College Dublin Graduate Diploma in Dermatology
Australian Institute of Dermatology Diploma
Journal of Drugs in Dermatology Free CME
Postgraduate Diploma in Clinical Dermatology – Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry
Cardiff University Department of Dermatology
Diploma in Dermatology – Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow
IMCAS International Master Course of Aging Skin
Medical dermatology for non-dermatologists
Derm In-Review Online Practice Exam and Study System
Hot topics in Dermatology 2015
eIntegrity healthcare elearning for dermatologists (British Association of Dermatologists)
Sunsmart training module for nurses
Paediatric Dermatology
See the iTunes store. Most podcasts may be downloaded for free.
Spot Diagnosis — The Skin Health Institute, Melbourne
Royal New Zealand College of Urgent Care
CME interview - Eczema flares - Dr Amanda Oakley
Urgent Bite 41 - Urticaria - with Dr Amanda Oakley
Dermcast.tv Society of Dermatology Physician Assistants
Journal of Investigative Dermatology SkinPod
Medscape Education Dermatology Podcast
MUSC Health Audio Podcasts Dermatology Medical University of South Carolina
Dermatologic Clinics Podcasts
Practical Dermatology by Bryn Mawr Communications
See the iTunes store, Google Play, Windows. Some apps require payment of a fee. There are dermatological and general medical encyclopaedias and MCQ Questions. Look for tools offering help with scoring PASI, SCORAD, EASI, DLQI.
Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology – Skyscape
Clearpath by DLCS (for iPad)
Corticocream Calculator
Dermatology Online Atlas
Dermnet.com Dermatologists' image resource
Global Skin Atlas International Atlas of Dermatology and Dermatopathology
Visualdx – dermatology
atlasdermatologico.com.br Dermatology Atlas
Medical Videos: Dermatology
Henry Schein: large discounts for AAD members
ClinicalTrials.gov US National Institutes of Health
Clinical Trials in Dermatology CenterWatch Clinical Trials listing Service™
UK Dermatology Clinical Trials Network
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry
Epocrates Point of Care Medical Applications
Find a dermatologist
New Zealand Dermatological Society members
American Academy: Find a dermatologist
Australasian medical associations
Dermatology journals
Dermatology societies and organisations
Worldwide dermatology links
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Uvb Phototherapy]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/uvb-phototherapy]
UVB Phototherapy (Ultraviolet Light Therapy) — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
UVB phototherapy — extra information
Broadband UVB phototherapy, Narrowband UVB phototherapy
229588000, 450522005, 238520006, 403721009, 428545002
Last reviewed: April 2023
Author(s): Dr Monisha Datta Purokayastha, Senior House Officer; Dr Jake Moss, Dermatology Registrar; and Dr Emily Davies, Dermatologist, Cheltenham General Hospital, England (2023)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Side effects and risks
What is UVB phototherapy?
Ultraviolet B (UVB) phototherapy delivers shortwave ultraviolet radiation to treat skin conditions such as psoriasis. Phototherapy works by suppressing DNA synthesis, which in turn reduces inflammation.
Narrowband UVB phototherapy (311–312 nm) is increasingly used compared to broadband UVB phototherapy (270–350 nm). This is because exposure and treatment times are shorter and result in longer periods of remission.
Young boy with atopic eczema undergoing whole body UVB treatment MED testing to determine initial dose of UVB UVB phototherapy burn 24 hrs after an exposure - protocols are designed to minimise the risk of this occurring
How is UVB phototherapy delivered?
UVB phototherapy is delivered within a specially designed cabinet. Fluorescent light tubes are positioned to target affected areas with ultraviolet radiation (eg, hands or feet). For full body treatments, patients are undressed with genitalia covered, and eyes or full face should be protected with goggles or a face mask.
Phototesting to determine the minimum dose that produces skin redness (MED testing) is recommended and a starting dose of 70% of the MED is often used. The dose is escalated by 20% each treatment, provided there are no side effects or episodes of burning.
Targeted phototherapy devices (eg, excimer laser, brush or comb devices) have also been developed as treatment options for more challenging areas while sparing uninvolved skin.
A full-body UVB cabinet
What is UVB phototherapy used for?
Dermatitis eg, atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
Pityriasis lichenoides
Symptomatic dermographism
Polymorphic light eruption
Cutaneous graft versus host disease
Generalised pruritus.
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder, which varies considerably in extent and severity. UVB is suitable for most people with extensive psoriasis. It may not suit those with very fair skin or those whose psoriasis gets worse in sunlight.
Most patients will have clearance or improvement in their psoriasis after 12 to 24 treatments. After treatment is discontinued the skin may remain clear for months. If psoriasis flares up again, further UVB treatment may be necessary.
UVB is effective in treating vitiligo by immune suppression and stimulation of cytokines. Treatment is given twice a week for 3–4 months and continued until re-pigmentation is complete or for 1–2 years. It may take several months to see an improvement and caution must be taken with fair skin.
What are the contraindications to UVB phototherapy?
Absolute contraindications:
Previous melanoma or skin cancer
Familial atypical multiple mole and melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome (also known as dysplastic naevus syndrome); see Atypical melanocytic naevus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis (juvenile or adult-onset)
Genetic conditions that predispose an individual to skin cancer (eg, xeroderma pigmentosum, Gorlin syndrome/basal cell naevus syndrome)
Bloom syndrome or Cockayne syndrome
Patients unwilling or unable to comply with safety procedures; or who are medically unfit and unable to stand (eg, severe cardiovascular or respiratory disease).
Relative contraindications:
History of exposure to arsenic/ionising radiation
Pregnancy (if used folic acid supplements should be taken and serum levels measured)
Current pre-malignant skin condition
Concomitant immunosuppressive therapy (ciclosporin, azathioprine, mycophenolate)
Photo-induced epilepsy
Bullous pemphigoid/pemphigus
Significant liver dysfunction
What are the benefits of UVB phototherapy?
Can be used to treat the whole body or localised areas.
Narrowband UVB phototherapy is less likely to cause cancer than PUVA (photochemotherapy) as there is less UV exposure and a narrower range of UV radiation.
Safer and often cheaper alternative to systemic therapy.
What are the disadvantages of UVB phototherapy?
What are the side effects and risks of UVB phototherapy?
Short-term side effects:
Itchy red rash 6–24 hours after treatment
Sunburn may sometimes occur
Reactivation of herpes simplex virus – cold sores may be prevented by sun protective lip balm
Worsening of skin disease
Provocation of photodermatoses
Increased pigmentation to treated area/s.
Long-term side effects:
Increased risk of skin cancer; those who have received more than 500 treatments may be considered for skin cancer surveillance
Instructions for patients receiving UVB phototherapy
Keep all scheduled appointments. Allow time for changing.
Do not apply any ointments or cosmetics (including perfumes and coal tar) except as directed by your doctor or phototherapist.
Follow your phototherapist’s advice re. application of moisturisers or sunscreens. Some products may prevent absorption of UVB if applied before treatment. In general, they should be avoided for 2 hours before the phototherapy exposure, but should be applied after the treatment.
Avoid other sources of exposure to ultraviolet light including natural sunlight and tanning beds.
During treatments, eye or full face UV protection with goggles or a face mask should be used, and genitalia covered
Notify the phototherapy team if you experience any side effects.
Ensure you are attending regular appointments with your dermatologist.
We suggest you refer to your national drug approval agency such as the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), UK Medicines and Healthcare products regulatory agency (MHRA) / emc, and NZ Medsafe, or a national or state-approved formulary eg, the New Zealand Formulary (NZF) and New Zealand Formulary for Children (NZFC) and the British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFC).
Goulden V, Ling TC, Babakinejad P, et al. British Association of Dermatologists and British Photodermatology Group guidelines for narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy 2022. Br J Dermatol. 2022;187(3):295-308. doi:10.1111/bjd.21669. PubMed
Rathod DG, Muneer H, Masood S. Phototherapy. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022. Available here
Taylor DK, Anstey AV, Coleman AJ, et al. Guidelines for dosimetry and calibration in ultraviolet radiation therapy: a report of a British Photodermatology Group workshop. Br J Dermatol. 2002;146(5):755–63. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2002.04740.x. Journal
Targeted phototherapy
Ultraviolet radiation and human health
Fitzpatrick skin phototypes
Psoriasis  — BMJ Best Practice
Psoriasis Association, United Kingdom
Phototherapy — National Psoriasis Foundation
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Vascular Proliferations And Abnormalities Of Blood Vessels]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/vascular-proliferations-and-abnormalities-of-blood-vessels]
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels — extra information
Blood vessel problems
Q82.5, I78.1, D18.0, D18.1, D46.0, C44.9
LC52, 2E81.0Z, EF20.3, LC50.Y, 1C11.Y, 2E81.0Y, 2E81.2Y, EF20.Z, EF20.4, LA90.00, 2A21.1Y, 2B57.1, 2B56.1
14350002, 399982001, 27550009, 11263005, 400132000, 69390003, 254206003, 93471006, 271481007, 1126411009, 402652009
Blood vessel problems
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, February 2016.
Malignant vascular tumours
The terminology of vascular conditions can be confusing, with several lesions being incorrectly named or classified. Vascular skin lesions include:
Malignant vascular tumours
A paediatric dermatologist, paediatrician, vascular specialist or surgeon should assess significant infantile capillary malformations or infantile haemangiomas, especially when large, symptomatic (especially when ulcerated), located on the head and neck or close to eye, nose or mouth.
Vascular naevi or anomalies are present at birth or appear in early childhood. They are classified according to the size and type of vessel. They may remain stable or become more prominent with maturity. There are various associated syndromes.
Capillary malformation – salmon patch and port wine stain.
Macrocephaly-capillary malformation
Venous malformation – glomuvenous malformation, arteriovenous malformations, blue rubber bleb syndrome (associated gastrointestinal lesions).
Arteriovenous malformations: of mixed blood vessel origin
Lymphatic malformation: lymphangioma circumscriptum, cavernous lymphangioma
Angioma serpiginosa: a crop of swirling vascular papules
Naevus anaemicus – in this naevus, blood flow is interrupted resulting in pale areas.
Capillary vascular malformation Lymphatic malformation Naevus anaemicus
An angioma or haemangioma is a benign tumour formed by the dilation of blood vessels or the formation of new ones by the proliferation of endothelial cells.
Infantile haemangioma (superficial, deep, or mixed): proliferates in the first few weeks of life, followed by involution later in childhood. These are sometimes syndromic, as in PHACE, LUMBAR and PELVIS syndromes.
Glomeruloid haemangioma is an eruptive form of haemangioma typically diagnosed in POEMS syndrome
Congenital haemangioma is at full size at birth and may rapidly involute (RICH) or persist (NICH)
Kaposiform haemangioendothelioma is a rare aggressive haemangioma that results in platelet trapping — the Kasabach-Merritt phenomenon.
Tufted angioma: rare childhood tumour with characteristic histology.
Cherry angioma: adult onset, common degenerative lesions, usually multiple
Angiokeratoma: acquired scaly angiomas, usually on vulva or scrotum, or in association with Fabry disease
Glomus tumour: tender papule on nail bed or palm arising in young to middle-aged adult
Pyogenic granuloma occurs in children and young adults on skin and mucosa, most often lower lips, fingers and toes. It may develop in response to a minor injury, in pregnancy, or when taking certain medications. It grows rapidly and may become pedunculated or polypoid and surrounded by a collarette of normal skin. It bleeds and crusts.
Bacillary angiomatosis is a rare opportunistic bacterial infection due to Bartonella henselae.
Infantile haemangioma Cherry angiomas Venous lake
Prominent cutaneous blood vessels can be physiological or pathological.
Blood vessels feeding a tumour such as basal cell carcinoma
A common sign of rosacea
A diagnostic feature of the CRST variant of systemic sclerosis
There are some named conditions in which telangiectasia is (or telangiectases are) characteristic.
Telangiectasia eruptiva macularis perstans, a form of mastocytosis
Spider telangiectasis consists of central arteriole and radiating capillaries. Very common in healthy individuals, but more arise in response to oestrogen, often in pregnancy, liver disease.
Venous lake: blue or purple compressible papule due to venous dilation, often on lower lip or ear.
Unilateral acquired telangiectasia: telangiectasia with naevoid distribution.
Essential telangiectasia: idiopathic telangiectasia and venulectasia.
Benign hereditary telangiectasia: a familial condition in which matt telangiectases appear
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: telangiectasia on the skin and mucous membranes associated with bleeding from nose and gut causing anaemia.
Diffuse dermal angiomatosis of the breast: painful ulceration and telangiectases of pendulous breasts
Acquired lymphangiectasia: “frog-spawn” appearance that follows lymphatic obstruction eg tumour or surgery.
Spider telangiectasis Essential telangiectasis Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasis
Malignant vascular tumours
Kaposi sarcoma: four types are recognised due to Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8). Multiple purple macules, papules and plaque on the skin and mucous membranes develop.
Angiosarcoma: idiopathic or secondary to chronic lymphoedema or radiation. Often aggressive, it mostly presents in elderly people with spreading purple patches and plaques that may bleed and ulcerate.
Intravascular B-cell lymphoma presents with rapid-onset irregular telangiectases.
Kaposi sarcoma Angiosarcoma Intravascular lymphoma
Vascular skin problems
Infantile haemangioma: Definition and pathogenesis
Infantile haemangioma: Complications and treatment
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Venous Eczema]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/venous-eczema]
Venous eczema, gravitational eczema
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Venous eczema — extra information
Gravitational eczema, Stasis dermatitis, Varicose eczema, Venous dermatitis, Varicose dermatitis
Eczemas, Blood vessel problems
EF70, EF5Y, EA86.0, BD74.2
366362000, 35498005, 709666005, 762536003, 238377008
Blood vessel problems
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1997. Updated January 2016.
What is venous eczema?
Venous eczema is a common form of eczema/dermatitis that affects one or both lower legs in association with venous insufficiency. It is also called gravitational dermatitis.
Who gets venous eczema?
Venous eczema is most often seen in middle-aged and older patients — it is reported to affect 20% of those over 70 years. It is associated with:
History of deep venous thrombosis in an affected limb
History of cellulitis in an affected limb
Chronic swelling of the lower leg, aggravated by hot weather and prolonged standing
What causes venous eczema?
Venous eczema appears to be due to fluid collecting in the tissues and activation of the innate immune response.
Normally during walking the leg muscles pump blood upwards and valves in the veins prevent pooling. A clot in the deep leg veins (deep venous thrombosis or DVT) or varicose veins may damage the valves. As a result back pressure develops and fluid collects in the tissues. An inflammatory reaction occurs.
What are the clinical features of venous eczema?
Venous eczema can form discrete patches or become confluent and circumferential. Features include:
Itchy red, blistered and crusted plaques; or dry fissured and scaly plaques on one or both lower legs
Orange-brown macular pigmentation due to haemosiderin deposition
Atrophie blanche (white irregular scars surrounded by red spots)
'Champagne bottle' shape of the lower leg — narrowing at the ankles and induration (lipodermatosclerosis)
Venous eczema Lipodermatosclerosis Venous ulcer
What are the complications of venous eczema?
Impetiginisation — secondary infection with Staphylococcus aureus resulting in yellowish crusts
Cellulitis — infection with Streptococcus pyogenes: there may be redness, swelling, pain, fever, a red streak up the leg, and swollen nodes in the groin
Secondary eczema — eczema spreads to other areas on the body
How is venous eczema diagnosed?
The diagnosis of venous eczema is clinical.
What is the treatment for venous eczema?
Reduce swelling in the leg
Don't stand for long periods.
Elevate your feet when sitting: if your legs are swollen they need to be above your hips to drain effectively.
Elevate the foot of your bed overnight.
During the acute phase of eczema, bandaging is important to reduce swelling.
When eczema has settled, wear graduated compression socks or stockings long term. Fitted moderate to high compression socks can be obtained from a surgical supplies company. Light compression using travel socks may be adequate, and these are easy to put on. They can be bought at pharmacies, travel and sports stores. More compression is obtained by wearing two pairs.
Horse chestnut extract appears to be of benefit for at least some patients with venous disease.
Dry up oozing patches with Condy's solution (potassium permanganate) or dilute vinegar on gauze as compresses.
Oral antibiotics such as flucloxacillin may be prescribed for a secondary infection.
Apply a prescribed topical steroid: start with a potent steroid cream applied accurately daily to the patches until they have flattened out. After a few days, change to a milder steroid cream (eg. hydrocortisone) until the itchy patches have resolved (maintenance treatment). Check with your doctor if you are using steroid creams for more than a few weeks. Overuse can thin the skin, but short courses of stronger preparations can be used from time to time if necessary to control dermatitis. Coal tar ointment may also help.
Use a moisturising cream frequently to keep the skin on the legs smooth and soft. If the skin is very scaly, urea cream may be especially effective.
Protect your skin from injury: this can result in infection or ulceration that may be difficult to heal.
Treatment for varicose veins
Seek the opinion of a vascular surgeon regarding varicose veins.
These can be treated surgically, by endovenous laser, or sclerotherapy.
Varicose veins may develop again after an apparently successful operation because venous disease is progressive.
How can venous eczema be prevented?
Venous eczema cannot be completely prevented but the number and severity of flare-ups can be reduced by the following measures.
Avoid prolonged standing or sitting with legs down.
Wear compression socks or stockings.
Avoid and treat leg swelling.
Apply emollients frequently and regularly to dry skin.
Avoid soap; use water alone or non-soap cleansers when bathing.
What is the outlook for venous eczema?
Venous eczema tends to be a recurring or chronic disorder lifelong. Treat recurrence promptly with topical steroids.
The Classification of Venous Disease – Simon Dodds
Venous insufficiency
Lipodermatosclerosis
Stasis Dermatitis — Medscape Reference
Venous eczema — British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Venous Insufficiency]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/venous-insufficiency]
Venous insufficiency
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Venous insufficiency
Venous insufficiency — extra information
Chronic venous insufficiency, Peripheral venous insufficiency, Venous insufficiency of the leg
Blood vessel problems
I87.2, I83, I83.009, I83.10, I87.319
BD74.Z, BD74.0, BD74.1Z, BD74.2, BD74.3Z, BD93.10, ED62.0, MG29.10,
443904006, 20696009, 234050002, 703283003, 440346008, 703280000, 238788004, 402863005, 35498005, 410016009, 762536003, 762537007, 128060009, 72866009, 706913006, 10692931000119102, 275700003, 403261006
Blood vessel problems
Venous insufficiency
Authors: Dr Jenny Caesar, Dermatology Registrar, Singleton Hospital, Swansee, UK. November 2020; Updated: Dr Ian Coulson, Consultant Dermatologist, East Lancashire NHS Trust, UK. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. August 2021
What is venous insufficiency?
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What is venous insufficiency?
Venous insufficiency occurs when the normal flow of blood from the superficial veins to the heart via the perforating deep veins in the lower limbs is impaired, resulting in chronic venous congestion. It can be classified as superficial vein insufficiency, perforating, or deep vein insufficiency.
Who gets venous insufficiency?
Venous insufficiency is common, affecting all races and both sexes. Estimates suggest rates as high as 50% in some populations. A US study found ethnic whites had a higher rate of venous insufficiency compared to Hispanics, African Americans, and Asians. The Edinburgh Vein Study reported the incidence of chronic venous insufficiency was similar in men and women. Prevalence increases with age, obesity, a family history of varicose veins, and multiple pregnancies.
What causes venous insufficiency?
The venous system in the lower legs consists of a low-pressure superficial network connected by perforating veins to a high-pressure deep network. Venous blood flows from the superficial to deep veins by the action of the calf muscle pump. Retrograde flow is prevented by competent valves.
Chronic venous insufficiency can be caused by:
Incompetent valve in the superficial, perforating, and deep systems
External compression of veins
Deep venous obstruction
Previous deep vein thrombosis
Impaired calf muscle pump
Immobility including lack of physical exercise and paralysis
Joint disease particularly of the ankle
Prolonged standing or sitting
Previous leg injury.
Once venous hypertension is established, the cutaneous features of chronic venous insufficiency are caused by:
Leukocytes trapped in capillaries release proteolytic enzymes and oxygen free radicals which damage the capillary basement membrane
Plasma proteins, such as fibrinogen, leak into the surrounding tissues, forming a fibrin cuff which reduces oxygen delivery to the tissues
Inflammation and tissue loss.
What are the clinical features of venous insufficiency?
Superficial venous insufficiency can be asymptomatic but may cause aching, cramping, throbbing, burning, or heaviness in the leg. Pain is typical of deep venous insufficiency. Symptoms improve with leg elevation.
Clinical signs of chronic venous insufficiency include:
Pitting oedema around the ankle, worse at the end of the day
Corona phlebectatica paraplantaris (malleolar flare) on the inner aspect of the ankle and instep – fan-shaped distribution of blue and red telangiectases (intradermal and superficial venules), capillary stasis spots (red-purple coin-shaped areas formed by papillary capillaries), and venous cups (dilated converging veins on the instep)
Telangiectasia adjacent to perforating veins
Pigmentation can be pinpoint or a patchy rusty-red due to extravasation of red blood cells and haemosiderin accumulation in the dermis
Clinical features of venous insufficiency
End-of-day ankle oedema Corona phlebectatica and venous eczema Varicosities and venous eczema
Pigment changes in venous insufficiency
Pinpoint pigmentation Varicosities and pigmentation Patchy rusty-red pigmentation
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
Venous insufficiency in Thai patients has been reported to be less likely to be associated with pain, oedema, inflammation, and visible varicose veins compared to ethnic whites.
What are the complications of venous insufficiency?
Lipodermatosclerosis
Venous eczema Varicose eczema
Stasis ulcers: active and healed
Leg ulcer Leg ulcer Venous ulcer
Complications of venous insufficiency
Lipodermatosclerosis and erosions Atrophie blanche Venous eczema and lipodermatosclerosis
How is venous insufficiency diagnosed?
Venous insufficiency is usually diagnosed on history and examination. Varicose veins may require the patient to be standing to appreciate. Duplex ultrasonography is the preferred investigation to demonstrate reflux and communications between the deep and superficial venous networks.
The CEAP (Clinical, Etiologic, Anatomic, Pathologic) system is used categorise and classify venous insufficiency but is unhelpful as a severity score. [see details Varicose veins]
The corona phlebectatica paraplantaris is a clinical sign of severe venous stasis. Specifically, blue telangiectases and capillary stasis spots may be the most useful correlates with the severity of chronic venous insufficiency.
What is the differential diagnosis for venous insufficiency?
Oedema — lipoedema, lymphoedema
Pigmentation — capillaritis
What is the treatment for venous insufficiency?
Soap and detergent avoidance
Regular use of moisturisers for dryness and itch
Lifestyle changes — regular exercise, leg elevation, weight loss
Graduated compression hosiery or bandages [see Compression therapy]
Telangiectasia — laser therapy, sclerotherapy
Varicose veins — sclerotherapy, endovenous laser therapy, radiofrequency ablation, surgery [see Leg vein therapies]
What is the outcome for venous insufficiency?
Venous insufficiency is inexorably progressive. The rate of complication development is not known.
Most patients with chronic venous insufficiency will experience at least intermittent episodes of venous eczema.
Leg ulceration is the most important complication and is a major burden for health systems throughout the world. Estimates suggest 4% of patients with varicose veins will develop venous leg ulcers in their lifetime.
Chiesa R, Marone EM, Limoni C, Volontè M, Petrini O. Chronic venous disorders: correlation between visible signs, symptoms, and presence of functional disease. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(2):322–36 doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2007.04.030. Journal
Criqui MH, Jamosmos M, Fronek A, et al. Chronic venous disease in an ethnically diverse population: the San Diego Population Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2003;158(5):448–56. doi:10.1093/aje/kwg166. Journal
Jawien A. The influence of environmental factors in chronic venous insufficiency. Angiology. 2003;54 Suppl 1:S19–S31. doi:10.1177/0003319703054001S04. PubMed
Labropoulos N. How does chronic venous disease progress from the first symptoms to the advanced stages? A Review. Adv Ther. 2019;36(Suppl 1):13–9. doi:10.1007/s12325-019-0885-3. Journal
Langer RD, Ho E, Denenberg JO, Fronek A, Allison M, Criqui MH. Relationships between symptoms and venous disease: the San Diego population study. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(12):1420–4. doi:10.1001/archinte.165.12.1420. PubMed
Necas M. Duplex ultrasound in the assessment of lower extremity venous insufficiency. Australas J Ultrasound Med. 2010;13(4):37–45. doi:10.1002/j.2205-0140.2010.tb00178.x. PubMed Central
Novak CJ, Khimani N, Kaye AD, Jason Yong R, Urman RD. Current therapeutic interventions in lower extremity venous insufficiency: a comprehensive review. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2019;23(3):16. doi:10.1007/s11916-019-0759-z. PubMed
Robertson L, Lee AJ, Evans CJ, et al. Incidence of chronic venous disease in the Edinburgh Vein Study. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2013;1(1):59–67. doi:10.1016/j.jvsv.2012.05.006. PubMed
Uhl JF, Cornu-Thenard A, Satger B, Carpentier PH. Clinical analysis of the corona phlebectatica. J Vasc Surg. 2012;55(1):150–3. doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2011.04.070. Journal
Youn YJ, Lee J. Chronic venous insufficiency and varicose veins of the lower extremities. Korean J Intern Med. 2019;34(2):269–83. doi:10.3904/kjim.2018.230. Journal
Lipodermatosclerosis
Venous insufficiency — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Venous Lake]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/venous-lake]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Venous lake — extra information
Acquired venous haemangioma, Senile haemangioma of lip
Blood vessel problems
402843003, 235052000
Blood vessel problems
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Maria McGivern/Gus Mitchell. December 2017.
Differential diagnoses
What is a venous lake?
A venous lake is a common bluish soft macule or papule due to vascular dilatation. It is most often seen on the lower lip.
Venous lake Venous lake Venous lake
Who gets a venous lake?
A venous lake is most often diagnosed in middle-aged or older men and women of any race.
What is the cause of a venous lake?
The cause of venous lake is unknown.
What are the clinical features of a venous lake?
A venous lake is a soft, squashable, blue or purple macule or papule, that is 0.2–1 cm in diameter. Although they may arise anywhere, most venous lakes are diagnosed on the lower lip (on the vermilion margin or mucosal surface), on an earlobe, or elsewhere on the face, neck, or upper trunk.
Effect of compression on a venous lake
Venous lake Compressing a venous lake Venous lake after compression
How is a venous lake diagnosed?
What is the differential diagnosis for a venous lake?
A venous lake may occasionally be confused with:
Spider telangiectasis.
What is the treatment of venous lake?
A venous lake is harmless and does not require treatment. A lesion that is unsightly can be removed by destroying the lesion. This causes a temporary scab, and the procedure may result in a scar. Treatments to remove a venous lake include:
Intense pulsed light
Surgical excision is rarely necessary and inevitably leaves a scar.
Venous lake treated with cryotherapy
Venous lake Venous lake
Vascular proliferations and abnormalities of blood vessels
Venous lakes — Medscape
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Viral Skin Infections]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/viral-skin-infections]
Viral skin infections
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Viral infections and the skin
Viral infections and the skin — extra information
B08, B09, B08.8, B08.20, B34.9, B97.89
EA3Z, 1F0Z 1F0Y, EA00, EA0Y
Viral infections and the skin
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2002.
Common childhood viral infections can cause widespread exanthems (rashes):
German measles (rubella)
Chickenpox (varicella)
Erythema infectiosum and papular purpuric gloves and socks syndrome (parvovirus)
Roseola (erythema subitum, due to herpesvirus 6 and 7)
Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever) (due to Epstein-Barr virus)
Enterovirus infections.
Other viral syndromes with mucocutaneous features include:
Pityriasis rosea, herpesviruses 6 and 7
Hand foot and mouth disease (enteroviral vesicular stomatitis), due to coxsackie infection. More widespread vesicular eruptions can also be due to enterovirus
Papular acrodermatitis of childhood (Gianotti-Crosti syndrome) most often caused by Epstein-Barr Virus or hepatitis B
Laterothoracic exanthem (asymmetric periflexural exanthem of childhood or APEC), cause uncertain but many viruses implicated in case reports
COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2)
Haemorrhagic fevers caused by togavirus, bunyavirus, and arenavirus are potentially fatal, with bleeding into the skin
Smallpox, a deadly disease hopefully now eradicated by widespread vaccination
Monkeypox, a newly emerged pox virus present in the Congo
Chikungunya fever, dengue, dengue haemorrhagic fever, and zika fever (due to arboviruses).
Other haemorrhagic fevers include Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (nairovirus), Lassa fever (arenavirus), Ebola haemorrhagic fever, and Marburg haemorrhagic fever (filovirus).
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis is a genetic disorder with a predisposition to unique cutaneous human papillomavirus types and skin cancer.
Various skin complaints are more common with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infections (AIDS) including acute human immunodeficiency virus infection syndrome and Kaposi sarcoma (which is due to infection with herpesvirus 8)
Rickettsial diseases are due to organisms classified between bacteria and viruses
Yellow fever is a serious flavivirus infection characterised by yellow skin and eyes due to jaundice.
Viral infections can also cause cancer. Examples include:
Human papillomavirus-associated penile, vulval, and oral intraepithelial neoplasia, vulval and oral cancer, epidermodysplasia verruciformis
Epstein–Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
Localised skin and mucosal conditions caused by viral infections include:
Herpes simplex (cold sores and genital herpes), eczema herpeticum, herpetic whitlow
Herpes zoster (shingles), including Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Herpangina / vesicular stomatitis (oral ulcers)
Molluscum contagiosum
Viral warts (verrucas, anogenital warts or condylomas and squamous cell papillomas)
Oral hairy leukoplakia.
In the future, we expect to classify more skin conditions as viral in origin as more sophisticated tests for viral particles become available.
Viral infections including viral hepatitis sometimes give rise to:
On DermNetHerpes viruses
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Antimicrobial peptides
Tropical skin diseases
Sexually acquired human papillomavirus
Non-sexually acquired human papillomavirus infection
Vaccines against human papillomavirus
Other websitesViral infections – Medscape Reference
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Viral Wart]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/viral-wart]
Warts, verrucas, human papillomavirus infection
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Viral wart — extra information
Verruca, Papilloma, viral warts
B07, B07.9, B07.8, B07.0, A63.0, B97.7
1E80, 1E80.0, 1E8Z, 1E81, 1E80.1, 1A95, 1A95.2
57019003, 6344008, 240539000, 57019003, 240536007, 722521002, 9482002
Author: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1996. Updated by Dr Jannet Gomez, Postgraduate student in Clinical Dermatology, Queen Mary University London, UK, December 2016. Updated February 2021 and minor update November 2025.
Differential diagnoses
What is a viral wart?
A viral wart is a very common benign lesion caused by infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). Viral warts can be classified by site as being cutaneous or mucosal as the HPV types are quite distinct [see Anogenital wart and Sexually acquired human papillomavirus for further information on mucosal HPV infection]. A cutaneous wart is also called a verruca or papilloma, and warty-looking lesions of any cause may be described as verrucous or papillomatous.
Common warts Plane warts Filliform wart
Who gets cutaneous viral warts?
Warts are particularly common in:
School-aged children, however they may occur at any age
Dermatitis, due to a defective skin barrier
People with drug-induced immunosuppression such as with long-term azathioprine or ciclosporin use, or have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
What causes cutaneous viral warts?
Warts are due to infection by the human papillomavirus (HPV), a double-stranded DNA virus. There are more than 150 known HPV types, only some of which infect the skin, giving rise to a variety of clinical presentations. Infection begins in the basal layer of the epidermis, causing proliferation of the keratinocytes (skin cells) and hyperkeratosis, and production of infectious virus particles — the wart. The most common HPV types infecting the skin are types 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 27, 29, and 57.
[see Non-sexually acquired human papillomavirus infection]
Autoinoculation of warts
Pseudo-koebnerisation of warts Subungual wart Subungual wart
What are the clinical features of viral warts?
Cutaneous viral warts have a hard, keratinous surface. Tiny red or black dots visible in the wart are papillary capillaries.
Common warts (verruca vulgaris) present as cauliflower-like papules with a rough, papillomatous and hyperkeratotic surface ranging in size from 1 mm to 1 cm or more. They may be solitary or multiple. Common warts are found most often on the knees, backs of fingers or toes, and around the nails (periungual).
Common warts (verruca vulgaris)
Verruca vulgaris on a thumb
Plantar warts (verruca plantaris) include tender inwardly growing myrmecia on the sole caused by HPV 1, and clusters of superficial less painful mosaic warts due to HPV 2. Myrmecial warts are typically tender with lateral and direct pressure, are surrounded by yellow hyperkeratotic callus-like skin showing accentuated skin markings, but with discontinuation of the skin lines through the actual wart.
Plantar epidermoid cysts are associated with HPV 60 infection of the eccrine ducts.
Plantar warts, myrmecial type (verruca plantaris)
Plantar warts, mosaic type
Plane warts are typically multiple small flat-topped skin-coloured papules located most commonly on the face, hands, and shins. On the shins and beard-area of the face the virus is often spread by shaving resulting in numerous warts. Plane warts are mostly caused by HPV types 3 and 10.
Plane warts (verruca plana)
Verruca plana in the beard area spread by shaving
A filiform wart is a cluster of fine fronds emerging from a narrow pedicle base usually found on the face. They are also described as digitate (finger-like).
Filiform and digitate warts
Butcher's warts are specifically caused by HPV 7 infecting the hands of butchers and others whose occupation involves chronic exposure to a cold moist environment. They clinically resemble common warts and tend to be numerous.
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis is a rare autosomal recessive condition susceptible to skin infection with specific HPV types that cause flat pityriasis versicolor-like lesions and squamous cell carcinoma.
What are the complications of cutaneous viral warts?
Viral warts are infectious to the patient and others.
Cutaneous warts can have significant psychosocial effects such as teasing at school, embarrassment, permission refused for swimming lessons.
Periungual warts can cause nail dystrophy and destruction.
Pain due to plantar warts (myrmecia type) interferes with walking and sporting activities, causing knee or hip pain.
In epidermodysplasia verruciformis the specific HPV types involved can cause cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas.
Periungual warts causing nail dystrophy
How is a cutaneous viral wart diagnosed?
Cutaneous viral warts are usually diagnosed clinically. Clinical clues to diagnosis can include:
Pinpoint red or black dots (papillary capillaries) are revealed when the wart is pared down. Patent capillaries cause pinpoint bleeding. Plantar corns lack the papillary capillaries.
Location of a plantar wart is not restricted to pressure sites whereas a plantar callus or corn is always at a pressure site.
Tenderness is maximal with lateral pressure for a plantar wart whereas a corn or callus is more tender with direct pressure.
Dermoscopy assists visualisation of the papillary capillaries of a viral wart, and can distinguish other verrucous lesions such as a seborrhoeic keratosis.
Diagnosis of viral warts
Red and black pinpoint dots of papillary capillaries Dermoscopy: viral wart Dermoscopy: viral wart
Skin biopsy is sometimes required when squamous cell carcinoma cannot be excluded clinically such as in an organ transplant recipient susceptible to both. [see Verruca vulgaris pathology, Verruca plana pathology]
What is the differential diagnosis of a cutaneous viral wart?
Differential diagnoses for a cutaneous viral wart can include:
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Squamous cell carcinoma
Plantar corn and callus.
What is the treatment for viral warts?
Presence of complications
Treatments do not kill the virus, but work by removing virus-containing skin. Persistence with the treatment and patience is essential! Remember HPV infects the basal cell layer of the epidermis so warts recur rapidly if the virus has not been eradicated.
Topical treatment includes wart paints, pastes, or patches containing salicylic acid, podophyllin, or similar compounds, which work by removing the surface skin cells.
Topical treatment is applied once daily to the wart. Treatment with wart paint usually makes the wart smaller and less uncomfortable; 70% of warts resolve within twelve weeks of daily applications.
Soften the wart by soaking in a bath or bowl of hot soapy water.
Rub the wart surface with a piece of pumice stone or emery board.
Apply wart paint or paste accurately and include a rim of normal skin.
Allow the paint to dry before covering with plaster or duct tape.
Next day remove the old paint and dead surface skin layer with a pumice stone and reapply the paint or paste.
If the wart paint makes the skin sore, stop treatment until the discomfort has settled, then recommence as above.
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen is repeated at one to two–week intervals to cause peeling of the surface layer. It is uncomfortable and results in blistering for several days or weeks. Treatment is required frequently to prevent the wart regrowing between appointments. Success is in the order of 70% after 3–4 months of regular freezing.
A hard freeze using liquid nitrogen might leave a permanent white mark. It can also cause temporary numbness if performed over a superficial nerve such as on the side of a finger.
Cryotherapy for warts
Electrosurgery (curettage and cautery) has been used for large and resistant warts. Under local anaesthetic, the growth is pared away and the base burned. The wound heals in two weeks or longer (depending on the site); even then 20% of warts can be expected to recur within a few months. This treatment leaves a permanent scar which can be painful to walk on if located on a pressure site. Recurrent wart in a scar is very hard to treat.
Other treatments for recurrent, resistant or extensive warts include:
The immune modulator, imiquimod cream - is approved for treating anogenital warts but is usually ineffective for cutaneous warts
Bleomycin injections
Pulsed dye laser destruction of feeding blood vessels
Photodynamic therapy
Microwave therapy for plantar warts
Topical methotrexate gel with microneedling.
How can viral warts be prevented?
Vaccines against human papillomavirus are available to prevent anogenital warts. Anecdotally, these have been reported to result in the clearance of non-genital warts in some people without definite evidence that the vaccine is the cause of remission.
What is the outcome for cutaneous viral warts?
No treatment is universally effective at eradicating viral warts.
In children, even without treatment, 50% of warts disappear within six months, and 90% are gone in 2 years.
Viral warts are more persistent in adults, but they clear up eventually. They are likely to recur in patients that are immunosuppressed, for example, organ transplant recipients. Recurrence is more frequent in tobacco smokers.
Immunity to HPV is likely to be type-specific.
British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the management of cutaneous warts 2014 – British Association of Dermatologists
Doorbar J, Egawa N, Griffin H, Kranjec C, Murakami I. Human papillomavirus molecular biology and disease association. Rev Med Virol. 2015;25 Suppl 1(Suppl Suppl 1):2-23. doi:10.1002/rmv.1822. PubMed Central
Friedman PC. Management of difficult-to-treat warts: traditional and new approaches [published online ahead of print, 2021 Jan 11]. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2021;10.1007/s40257-020-00582-4. doi:10.1007/s40257-020-00582-4. PubMed
Ringin SA. The effectiveness of cutaneous wart resolution with current treatment modalities. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2020;13(1):24-30. doi:10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_62_19. PubMed Central
Sterling JC, Gibbs S, Haque Hussain SS, Mohd Mustapa MF, Handfield-Jones SE. British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the management of cutaneous warts 2014. Br J Dermatol. 2014 Oct. 171(4):696-712. PubMed.
Youn, Sung Hwan, et al. A two-week interval is better than a three-week interval for reducing the recurrence rate of hand-foot viral warts after cryotherapy: a retrospective review of 560 hand-foot viral warts patients. Annals of Dermatology 23.1 (2011): 53-60.
Wenner R, Askari SK, Cham PM, Kedrowski DA, Liu A, Warshaw EM. Duct tape for the treatment of common warts in adults: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. Arch Dermatol. 2007;143(3):309-13. doi:10.1001/archderm.143.3.309. PubMed
Youn SH, Kwon IH, Park EJ, Kim KH, Kim KJ. A two-week interval is better than a three-week interval for reducing the recurrence rate of hand-foot viral warts after cryotherapy: a retrospective review of 560 hand-foot viral warts patients. Ann Dermatol. 2011;23(1):53-60. doi:10.5021/ad.2011.23.1.53. PubMed
Verruca plana pathology
Verruca vulgaris pathology
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
Sexually acquired human papillomavirus
Non-sexually acquired human papillomavirus infection
Vaccines against human papillomavirus
Warts — Medline Plus
New Zealand HPV Project
Nongenital warts — Medscape Reference
Plantar Warts (Verrucas) — British Association of Dermatologists
Nongenital Warts — Medscape Reference
Plantar Warts — emedicinehealth
Warts — emedicinehealth
Patient information: Skin warts (The Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Patient information: Skin warts (Beyond the Basics) — UpToDate (for subscribers)
Warts: Patient Handouts — The Society for Pediatric Dermatology
Warts — American Academy of Dermatology
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Vulval Cysts]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/vulval-cysts]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Vulval cysts — extra information
N90.7, Q52.79, N90.89, N90.9, N76.4, L72.0, N80.8, N75.0, Q52.4, L72.2, L72.3, L05.91
GA13.3, LB40.1, EK70.Y, EK70.0Z, GA10.6, GA03.1, GA13.5, GC0Y, GA13.Y, LB45.9, 2F22,
60098005, 282025003, 31339007, 37719003, 38780008, 47639008, 19633006, 109433009, 254685008, 717706003, 57044006, 419603000, 54176009, 82520000, 447030009
Authors: Dr Yi Jia Lee, Resident Medical Officer, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, WA, Australia; Dr Varitsara Mangkorntongsakul, Senior Medical Officer, Central Coast Local Health District, Gosford, NSW, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. November 2020
Differential diagnoses
What is a vulval cyst?
A vulval cyst is an encapsulated lesion that contains fluid or semi-fluid material occurring on the external female genitalia. Vulval cysts can develop from any of the structures normally found in this complex area.
Who gets vulval cysts?
Females of any age can present with a vulval cyst; however, a particular type of cyst may be more common in a specific age group.
What causes vulval cysts?
Vulval cysts can be developmental, genetic, post-traumatic, or spontaneous.
What are the clinical features of vulval cysts?
Vulval cysts are dome-shaped, firm or fluctuant, discrete lesions which may be asymptomatic and noticed incidentally, or present due to pain or dyspareunia which may be cyclic, intermittent, or persistent. The location or distribution of the cysts can be characteristic for a particular type of cyst.
Common cutaneous cysts on the vulva
Vulval milia are 1–2 mm, white cysts very commonly seen on examination of the labia of older women. The patient may be aware of the multiple small lumps, but typically they are asymptomatic and an incidental finding.
Epidermoid cysts are commonly found on the cutaneous aspect of the labia majora of middle-aged and elderly women. The cysts may be solitary or multiple, spontaneous or post-surgical, usually presenting as a painless lump up to a centimetre in diameter. Giant epidermoid cyst of the vulva has been described.
Cysts specific to the vulval area
Bartholin and Skene duct cysts
Cysts of the Bartholin gland or Skene duct contain clear mucoid fluid. Bartholin glands are located towards the back and side of the introitus at the 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock positions. Skene glands are adjacent to the distal urethra. Cysts may present as a lump, or as painful swelling if the cyst has become infected and an abscess has formed. Bartholin duct cysts are reported to affect 2% of adult women at some time in their life. Skene duct cysts can also present in neonates. Diagnosis is usually made by the anatomic location of the cyst.
Vestibular mucinous cyst
Mucinous cysts develop from minor vestibular glands found on the inner labia minora along Hart lines. Cysts may be found incidentally, present as a palpable lump noticed by the patient, or cause pain should the cyst become inflamed. Vestibular mucinous cysts typically develop between puberty and the fourth decade.
Cyst of the canal of Nuck
A cyst of the canal of Nuck is a developmental anomaly due to incomplete closure of the round ligament and is the equivalent of a spermatic cord hydrocele in males. It presents as a skin-coloured, asymptomatic swelling located in the inguinal area and labium majorum, resembling an inguinal hernia. It is usually detected by five years of age.
A Gartner, or mesonephric, cyst develops in remnants of an incompletely regressed mesonephric duct. The mesonephric duct forms the male sexual organs, so should regress completely in the female fetus. Persistent mesonephric duct remnants in a female are usually associated with congenital abnormalities of the metanephric urinary system such as an ectopic ureter, unilateral renal agenesis or hypoplasia. A Gartner cyst is a small solitary unilateral cyst on the front vaginal wall towards one side, which may bulge to present as an interlabial mass in late adolescence.
Ciliated cyst of the vulva
At the ninth week of gestation, the paramesonephric duct develops into the fallopian tube. Remnants of this duct can form a ciliated, or paramesonephric, cyst found incidentally on the labium majorum during pregnancy, puberty, or with other hormonal influences. The lesion is usually a single cyst cavity, 1–3 cm in diameter, and drains clear or amber-coloured fluid if ruptured.
Cutaneous cysts that may occur on the vulva
Eruptive vellus hair cysts
Eruptive vellus hair cysts present as multiple small yellow-brown papules usually on the front of the trunk but have been rarely reported on the labia majora.
Steatocystoma is an autosomal dominant skin condition resulting in an abnormal proliferation of the pilosebaceous duct junction. The resultant skin papules drain an oily fluid when punctured. Involvement localised to the vulva has been rarely reported as a late-onset sporadic condition.
Pilonidal disease is usually found at the upper end of the gluteal cleft, but has been reported as a painless papule or nodule on the vulva, particularly in the area around the clitoris, due to an ingrown hair forming a dermoid cyst.
Cutaneous endometriosis can rarely occur on the vulva at the site of previous obstetric or surgical trauma. It presents as nodules, patches, or cysts filled with fresh or clotted blood.
What are the complications of vulval cysts?
Inflammation and infection
Dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse)
How is a vulval cyst diagnosed?
Diagnosis of a vulval cyst is usually clinical based on the age at presentation, location, and appearance. Ultrasound examination or histology of a skin biopsy or excision specimen may sometimes be required.
What is the differential diagnosis for a vulval cyst?
Vascular lesions — cherry angioma, angiokeratoma, haemangioma, varicosities
Infections — viral wart, herpes simplex virus, bullous impetigo
Inflammatory conditions — sebaceous adenitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, bullous fixed drug eruption
What is the treatment for a vulval cyst?
The majority of vulval cysts do not require treatment once the diagnosis has been made. Cysts may be drained, marsupialised, extracted, or excised.
What is the outcome for a vulval cyst?
Vulval cysts are generally benign. Some may resolve or rupture spontaneously. Recurrence can follow surgical intervention particularly if the entire cyst wall has not been removed.
Bala R, Nagpal M, Kaur M, Kaur H. Posterior vaginal wall Gartner's duct cyst. J Midlife Health. 2015;6(4):187–90. doi:10.4103/0976-7800.172354. PubMed Central
Campbell K, Panza J, Zimmerman C. Symptomatic vulvar mucinous cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Case Rep Womens Health. 2019;24:e00141. doi:10.1016/j.crwh.2019.e00141. PubMed
Cheng H, Sohal S, Cheung K. Eruptive vellus hair cysts of the vulva. Australas J Dermatol. 2017;58(4):e254–5. doi:10.1111/ajd.12574. PubMed
Ghosh M, Bitetti S, Busby G. Ciliated cyst of the vulva - a case report. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2020;S1083-3188(20)30300- doi:10.1016/j.jpag.2020.08.006. PubMed
Kanis MJ, Momeni M, Zakashansky K. Pilonidal cyst of the clitoris. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg. 2014;20(5):297–8. doi:10.1097/SPV.0000000000000065. Journal
Omole F, Kelsey RC, Phillips K, Cunningham K. Bartholin duct cyst and gland abscess: office management. Am Fam Physician. 2019;99(12):760–6. PubMed
Prodromidou A, Paspala A, Schizas D, Spartalis E, Nastos C, Machairas N. Cyst of the canal of Nuck in adult females: a case report and systematic review. Biomed Rep. 2020;12(6):333–8. doi:10.3892/br.2020.1295. PubMed Central
Rongioletti F, Cattarini G, Romanelli P. Late onset vulvar steatocystoma multiplex. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27(6):445–7. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01027.x. Journal
Sand FL, Thomsen SF. Clinician's update on the benign, premalignant, and malignant skin tumours of the vulva: the dermatologist's view. Int Sch Res Notices. 2017;2017:2414569. doi:10.1155/2017/2414569. PubMed
Scurry J, McGrath G. Multiple mucinous cysts on the anterior of Hart's lines of the vulva. Pathology. 2012;44(5):479–80. doi:10.1097/PAT.0b013e3283559d1d. PubMed
Cutaneous cysts and pseudocysts
Vulval lumps and bumps
Vulvar abscess — UpToDate
What is a Bartholin abscess? — Medscape
Vulvovaginal Disorders: A Pathway to Diagnosis and Treatment
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Vulval Intraepithelial Neoplasia]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/vulval-intraepithelial-neoplasia]
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). Squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia — extra information
Vulvar squamous intraepithelial lesion, VIN, Squamous cell carcinoma-in-situ of the vulva, Bowen disease of vulva, Vulval dysplasia
N90.3, N90.0, N90.1, D07.1, D07.30
2E67.10, 2E67.1, GA13.1, 2F33.0, 2E67.10
399933001, 20365006, 22725004, 313351009, 302812006, 240545008, 767544007, 399911003, 276873004, 276874005, 403475002, 399966002
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2003. Updated by Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley and Dr Darion Rowan, Dermatologists, New Zealand, September 2017.
Treatment and follow-up
What is vulval intraepithelial neoplasia?
Vulval (or vulvar) intraepithelial neoplasia is a pre-cancerous skin lesion (a type of squamous cell carcinoma in situ) that can affect any part of the vulva. The term vulval intraepithelial neoplasia describes two conditions with different biological behaviour: usual type and differentiated type.
Usual type vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
Usual-type VIN is associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, and is also called uVIN and vulval high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL). In this article, we abbreviate the condition as uVIN/HSIL.
uVIN/HSIL is an intraepithelial form of squamous cell carcinoma
uVIN/HSIL was previously known as Bowen disease of the vulva, but this term is no longer used.
The term uVIN/HSIL excludes vulval extramammary Paget disease and vulval in-situ melanoma.
Differentiated vulval intraepithelial neoplasia
Differentiated VIN (dVIN) is associated with inflammatory diseases of the vulva, lichen sclerosus and erosive lichen planus (and not with HPV). It is much less common than uVIN/HSILand accounts for 5% of VIN. Up to 85% of dVIN will progress to SCC if untreated.
How do uVIN/HSIL and dVIN present?
Although some women do not have symptoms, uVIN/HSIL and dVIN often present with:
Mild to severe vulval itching
Mild to severe vulval burning
One or more flat or slightly raised well-defined skin lesions
These may be pink, red, brown and/or white in colour.
Why do VIN/HSIL and dVIN occur and who is at risk?
The following factors have been associated with uVIN/HSIL.
Smoking: it is thought that the cancer promoting agents in cigarettes are concentrated in the skin of the lower genital tract and smokers have a higher risk of uVIN/HSIL than non-smokers.
Immunosuppression by disease, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, or medications, such as those taken by organ transplant recipients.
dVIN is associated with chronic vulval inflammatory skin disease, particularly lichen sclerosus or erosive lichen planus. The average age of presentation with dVIN is 60 years.
How are uVIN/HSIL and dVIN diagnosed?
One or more flat or thickened, irregular red, white or pigmented plaques on the vulva may suggest a diagnosis of uVIN/HSIL or dVIN. Colposcopy (examination using magnification and a special light) may be used to examine the appearance and extent of the condition. A skin biopsy is required to confirm abnormal epithelial cells within the epithelium, and to identify any invasive cancer.
The epithelium may be hyperkeratotic (scaly) and acanthotic (thickened).
uVIN/HSIL reveals vacuolated and dysplastic cells with mitoses throughout the epithelium, which can include follicular epithelium.
dVIN reveals dysplastic cells and mitoses confined to the basal layer.
Immunohistochemistry stains: uVIN/HSIL is p16 positive, and dVIN is p53 positive.
Warty lesions in postmenopausal women should undergo biopsy, particularly if they do not resolve with simple treatment.
Women with vulval lichen sclerosus and erosive lichen planus should be followed up carefully. Any areas failing to respond to high-potency topical corticosteroids, particularly if hyperkeratotic, should have a biopsy taken to exclude dVIN.
Classification of VIN/SIL
The classification of uVIN/SIL has evolved over a number of years. The terminology adopted by the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Diseases (ISSVD) in 2015 is:
Low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (flat condyloma or HPV effect) (LSIL)
High grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (VIN usual type) (HSIL), previously called VIN 2 and VIN3
Intraepithelial neoplasia, differentiated-type (dVIN)
HSIL and dVIN have potential to progress to invasive vulval cancer, whereas LSIL lesions are low risk and are not neoplastic. HSIL-associated cancers tend to be warty in appearance.
Does uVIN/HSIL need to be treated?
LSIL does not always require treatment, but follow-up should be arranged until the lesions resolve, as they sometimes progress to uVIN/HSIL.
There is also a group of younger women with multifocal uVIN/HSIL whose disease resolves spontaneously within a year. Their lesions are usually papular and pigmented. If they persist for longer, treatment should be performed.
uVIN/HSIL and d-VIN are treated to reduce the risk of developing invasive cancer and to alleviate symptoms.
What treatments are available for uVIN/HSIL?
The aim is to remove all affected tissue with a margin of apparently unaffected tissue. This may be done by surgical excision. Sometimes a complete vulvectomy (removal of the vulva) is undertaken because of the extent of disease or because of multifocal uVIN/HSIL. Excision is also undertaken for dVIN, which is rarely multifocal but can be more aggressive than uVIN/HSIL.
If invasive cancer is not suspected, laser ablation may be used in some centres. Like surgical excision, it is performed under general anaesthetic.
Imiquimod cream, applied 3 times weekly for 12 to 20 weeks. This results in red, inflamed, and eroded tissue and is often accompanied by considerable discomfort.
5-fluorouracil cream, applied twice daily for several weeks. This causes quite severe inflammation for several weeks, and will not be tolerated by all women. It is less effective than imiquimod cream and thus is used less frequently than in the past.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) requires specialised equipment and can also be very painful.
Therapeutic HPV vaccination.
Cidovir has been described to be useful in some patients.
None of these medical treatments are officially approved for uVIN/HSIL and they are rarely recommended for dVIN.
Unfortunately uVIN/HSIL recurs in up to half of of patients after treatment. This is more likely if:
The patient is immunosuppressed
The lesion was incompletely removed (positive margins may have been reported by the pathologist)
Disease is multifocal.
Lichen sclerosus associated with dVIN is also a risk factor for recurrence.
Prevention of uVIN/HSIL and dVIN
Immunisation with HPV vaccine has been shown to decrease the development of uVIN/HSIL as well as cervical cancer and genital warts. Theoretically, nine–valent HPV vaccine could reduce the risk by 80–90%. It does not reduce the risk of dVIN.
Women that have had genital warts or previous uVIN/HSIL should be strongly encouraged to stop smoking.
Effective treatment of vulval skin disorders such as lichen sclerosus may reduce the risk of uVIN/HSIL, dVIN, and vulval cancer.
What is the outcome for women with uVIN/HSIL and dVIN?
LSIL usually resolves within a year or two.
uVIN/HSIL may develop into an invasive cancer. On average it takes 6–7 years for untreated HPV-associated uVIN/HSIL to progress to cancer.
Careful follow-up after treatment is essential long term.
Follow-up every 6–12 months is recommended for at least 5 years after surgery for uVIN/HSIL and indefinitely for dVIN.
Up to 50% of women with uVIN/HSIL develop cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), vaginal intraepeithelial neoplasia (VAIN) or invasive cancer of the genital tract or anus.
It is particularly important to have regular cervical smears.
Immunosuppressed patients, especially those with HIV infection, should also undergo cytology of the anus.
Lower anogenital squamous terminology
Genital skin problems
Vulval squamous cell carcinoma
Anal squamous cell carcinoma
Sexually acquired human papilloma virus
Vaccines against human papilloma virus
Vulvar Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions — ISSVD (PDF)
ISSVD Vulvovaginal Disorders: an algorithm for basic adult diagnosis and treatment
Vulvovaginal Disorders: A Pathway to Diagnosis and Treatment
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Vulval Lumps And Bumps]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/vulval-lumps-and-bumps]
Vulval lumps and bumps
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Vulval lumps and bumps
Vulval lumps and bumps — extra information
N90.89, N94.89, A63.0, D28.9, C57, D28, D28.0, N90.7, N90.9
2F33.Y, 2C70.Z, 2C70.Y, 1A95.1, GA13.3, GA03.1
289474006, 289477004, 126922007, 92486005, 94143002, 363367000, 237109002, 60098005
Vulval lumps and bumps
Author: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand, May 2011.
The appearance of the vulva is highly variable (see Women's Health Victoria site, "the labia library".
Proliferative lesions affecting the vulva may originate from skin, mucosa or underlying connective tissue.
Skin lesions are mainly typical of those found elsewhere on the body, and are found on the outer aspects of the vulva, the labia majora, extending to the groin. They include benign (harmless) and malignant (cancerous) tumours. They are often classified according to cell of origin.
Melanocytic naevus (mole)
Often atypical: larger than in other sites, irregular in pigmentation, with flat and bumpy components
Perineal pyramidal protrusion
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ
Invasive squamous cell carcinoma
Lymphatic malformation
Superficial angiomyxoma
Angiomyofibroblastoma
Cellular angiofibroma
Fibroepithelial polyp / skin tag
Superficial myofibroblastoma
Extramammary Paget disease
Bartholin gland carcinoma
Aggressive angiomyxoma
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
Fat (adipose tissue)
Granular cell tumour
Malignant schwannoma
Merkel cell carcinoma
Viral infections may mimic lesions.
Molluscum contagiosum
Mucosal lesions occur in the inner aspects of the vulva, where the tissue is nonkeratinised (ie, not scaly).
Hidrocystadenoma papilliferum
Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Genital skin diseases
Skin lesions, tumours and cancers
The labia Library — Women’s Health Victoria
ISSVD Vulvovaginal Disorders: an algorithm for basic adult diagnosis and treatment
Vulvovaginal Disorders: A Pathway to Diagnosis and Treatment
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Warfarin Induced Skin Necrosis]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/warfarin-induced-skin-necrosis]
Warfarin induced skin necrosis
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis — extra information
403659005, 403658002, 717043006
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis
Author: Dr Ritva Vyas, Dermatology Registrar, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand, 2009. Updated by A/Prof Amanda Oakley, February 2016.
What is warfarin-induced skin necrosis?
Warfarin is an anticoagulant medicine (blood thinner). Warfarin-induced skin necrosis refers to a rare condition in which there is paradoxical blood clotting. Blood clots block the blood vessels and cause necrosis, where an area of skin is destroyed. Warfarin-induced skin necrosis affects one in every 10,000 patients prescribed warfarin.
The onset is usually within the first 2 to 5 days of warfarin therapy when the blood tends to clot more than is normal. Skin necrosis affects areas of the body with a high fat content.
Warfarin can also give rise to calciphylaxis, a form of cutaneous necrosis due to occlusion of blood vessels with calcium.
Who gets warfarin-induced skin necrosis?
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis is more common in women than men. It usually occurs between the age of 50 and 70 years. It is more common in obese patients and perimenopausal women.
Warfarin-induced skin necrosis is more likely if warfarin is given without heparin or if a higher loading dose of warfarin is given in the first day or two of treatment.
Very rarely, warfarin-induced skin necrosis occurs weeks or months after starting warfarin therapy. This may occur in the following circumstances:
the dose of warfarin has been increased
prescribed doses have not been taken
Calciphylaxis is more often seen in the setting of chronic renal failure but may be rarely caused by warfarin when kidney function is normal.
What causes warfarin-induced necrosis?
Warfarin is a widely used anticoagulant or blood-thinner. It works by inactivating vitamin K-dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX and X. At the same time, Vitamin K dependent proteins C and S are inactivated – these are natural anticoagulants.
Half the activated Protein C disappears within 6 hours (its half-life). So, Protein C runs out during the first few days of warfarin therapy, before Factor X and II disappear, which have half-lives of 2-5 days. In some circumstances, this leads to excessive clotting.
Why the skin necrosis happens in the areas of fat abundance is unclear; possibly these areas are more susceptible because of reduced blood supply.
Warfarin-induced calciphylaxis may be due to inhibition of the matrix protein Gla, which normally prevents calcium deposition in the blood vessels.
What are the risk factors for warfarin-induced skin necrosis?
Risk factors for warfarin-induced skin necrosis include:
Inherited deficiency of Protein C, Protein S or Factor V Leiden
Mutations in methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase gene causing hyperhomocysteinaemia
Antithrombin III deficiency
Antiphospholipid antibodies.
What are the clinical features of warfarin-induced skin necrosis?
The first sign is usually pain and purpura (a purplish bruise-like rash), which over a few days becomes bluish-black with a red rim. Blood blisters and full thickness skin necrosis (skin death) follows. There may be a red netlike rash around the necrotic area (retiform purpura). Affected areas are most often the breasts, thighs, buttocks, hips and abdomen, but early warfarin-induced skin necrosis can also cause blue toe syndrome.
The diagnosis of warfarin-induced skin necrosis is made clinically.
A skin biopsy can aid in diagnosis. Histopathology of warfarin necrosis usually reveals clotting within blood vessels in the skin without any inflammation. Warfarin can also precipitate calciphylaxis, recognised on biopsy by calcium deposition in the affected skin.
Blood tests for protein C and protein S levels are important to assess the likely predisposing causes.
What is the treatment for warfarin-induced skin necrosis?
The mainstay of treatment of warfarin-induced skin necrosis is to stop warfarin. If anticoagulation is required, heparin can be used. Sometimes Vitamin K is used to hasten the reversal of warfarin effects. If there is life-threatening coagulation then protein C concentrates can be used.
Once warfarin is stopped small areas of skin necrosis can be left to heal, but larger areas of skin necrosis may require surgery and skin grafting.
Warfarin has been cautiously restarted in lower doses in some patients when needed for long-term anticoagulation. This is best done with advice from a haematologist.
Ng T, et al. Warfarin induced skin necrosis associated with Factor V Leiden and protein S deficiency. Clinical Laboratory Haematology 2001,23; 261–4. Medline
Scarff C, et al. Late onset warfarin necrosis. Australasian Journal of Dermatology 2002, 43:202–6. Medline
Parsi K, et al. Warfarin induced skin necrosis with acquired protein C deficiency. Australasian Journal of Dermatology 2003, 44:57–61. Medline
Byrne, et al. Warfarin skin necrosis associated with protein S deficiency and a mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene. Clinical Dermatology 2004, 29:35–6. Medline
Moll S. Warfarin induced skin necrosis. BJ Haem 2004;126:628. Journal
Pitfalls in warfarin therapy. Clinical Applications in Thrombosis/Hemostasis 2006,12:1–2. Messmore H et al. Medline.
Warfarin induced skin necrosis a case report. Clinical Applications in Thrombosis/Hemostasis 2006,12:101–4. Abdul-Jabar et al. Medline.
Warfarin induced skin necrosis after open heart surgery due to protein S and C deficiency. Heart vessels 2007, 22:64–66. Savas Oz et al. Medline.
Dermatology. Ed. Bolognia, J et al. 2nd edition 2007. Mosby.
Warfarin and Calciphylaxis — A Rare but Serious Adverse Event. Medsafe Prescriber Update 38(3): 38–9. September 2017. Website.
Warfarin necrosis – pathology
Coumarin necrosis case 1
Heparin-induced skin thrombocytopenia
Bullous drug eruptions
Dermatologic Manifestations of Hematologic Disease
Protein C Deficiency
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wells Syndrome]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wells-syndrome]
Wells syndrome (eosinophilic cellulitis)
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Eosinophilic cellulitis
Eosinophilic cellulitis — extra information
Rashes, Inflammation
Eosinophilic cellulitis
Author: Dr Fiona Larsen, Dermatology Registrar, Green Lane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, 2005. Updated by Dr Janice Yeon, Dermatology Research Fellow, The Skin Hospital, Sydney NSW, Australia. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2020.
Differential diagnoses
What is eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis is an uncommon recurrent inflammatory skin disease, also known as Wells syndrome.
Eosinophilic cellulitis Eosinophilic cellulitis Eosinophilic cellulitis
Who gets eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis can affect all age groups including children and infants.
What causes eosinophilic cellulitis?
The cause of eosinophilic cellulitis is unknown. It is believed to be a local hypersensitivity reaction.
Medications and immunisations
Haematological disorders and malignancies.
What are the clinical features of eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis usually presents as itchy or burning erythematous nodules or plaques resembling cellulitis or erysipelas on a limb. However, the clinical appearance is variable: lesions can be single or multiple, the face and trunk may be affected, and clinical morphology can include:
Annular granuloma-like
Fixed drug eruption-like.
The classic plaque-type variant of eosinophilic cellulitis is the most common presentation in children, whereas the annular granuloma-like variant is more frequently seen in adults.
Individual lesions can resolve spontaneously but typically recur.
Associated systemic symptoms may include fever and arthralgias.
What are the complications of eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis may be rarely complicated by superinfection.
Severe swelling of a limb can cause compartment syndrome.
How is eosinophilic cellulitis diagnosed?
Eosinophilic cellulitis is often misdiagnosed initially as cellulitis or erysipelas, and is only considered when antibiotic treatment is unhelpful.
Proposed diagnostic criteria for eosinophilic cellulitis require at least two major and one minor criteria.
Major criteria for an eosinophilic cellulitis diagnosis include:
Clinical picture to include any of the reported variants
No evidence of systemic disease
Relapsing, remitting course
Histology comprises eosinophilic infiltrates without vasculitis.
Minor criteria for an eosinophilic cellulitis diagnosis include:
Peripheral eosinophilia not persistent and not greater than >1.5 x 109/L
Histology has granulomatous change
A triggering factor (eg, a drug).
Skin biopsy is usually required and the histological findings depend on the stage of disease.
Key findings in the acute phase are dermal oedema with an eosinophilic infiltrate and without vasculitis.
The subacute phase shows the characteristic ‘flame figures’.
The chronic phase is granulomatous with histiocytes and giant cells (see Wells syndrome pathology).
Flame figures are not pathognomonic of Wells syndrome and can be seen with other eosinophilic infiltrates, such as:
Arthropod bite reactions
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Parasitic infection.
What is the differential diagnosis for eosinophilic cellulitis?
The differential diagnosis for eosinophilic cellulitis may include:
Bacterial cellulitis and erysipelas
Parasitic infestation
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
What is the treatment for eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis rapidly responds to an oral corticosteroid, such as prednis(ol)one, but often relapses when the steroid dose is reduced.
Other treatments used may include:
Topical corticosteroid
Treatment of an associated trigger, such as cessation of an implicated drug, can lead to complete resolution.
What is the outcome for eosinophilic cellulitis?
Eosinophilic cellulitis has a benign course with a tendency for lesions to spontaneously resolve. However, recurrence is common.
Wells GC, Smith NP. Eosinophilic cellulitis. Br J Dermatol. 1979;100(1):101–9. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.1979.tb03574.x. PubMed
Heelan K, Ryan JF, Shear NH, Egan CA. Wells syndrome (eosinophilic cellulitis): proposed diagnostic criteria and a literature review of the drug-induced variant. J Dermatol Case Rep. 2013;7(4):113–20. doi:10.3315/jdcr.2013.1157. PubMed Central
Nielsen T, Schmidt H, Søgaard H. Eosinophilic cellulitis. (Well's syndrome) in a child. Arch Dermatol. 1981;117(7):427–9. Journal
Anderson CR, Jenkins D, Tron V, Prendiville JS. Wells' syndrome in childhood: case report and review of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995;33(5 Pt 2):857–64. doi:10.1016/0190-9622(95)90423-9. Journal
Fujii K, Tanabe H, Kanno Y, Konishi K, Ohgou N. Eosinophilic cellulitis as a cutaneous manifestation of idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2003;49(6):1174–7. doi:10.1016/s0190-9622(03)00466-3. PubMed
Räßler F, Lukács J, Elsner P. Treatment of eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells syndrome) - a systematic review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30(9):1465–79. doi:10.1111/jdv.13706. PubMed
Yeon J, Chan RC, Zagarella S. Eosinophilic cellulitis successfully treated with methotrexate [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 25]. Australas J Dermatol. 2020;10.1111/ajd.13358. doi:10.1111/ajd.13358. Journal
Sinno H, Lacroix JP, Lee J, et al. Diagnosis and management of eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells' syndrome): a case series and literature review. Can J Plast Surg. 2012;20(2):91–7. doi:10.1177/229255031202000204. PubMed Central
Wells syndrome pathology
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wells Syndrome Pathology]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wells-syndrome-pathology]
Wells syndrome pathology
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Wells syndrome pathology
Wells syndrome pathology — extra information
Eosinophilic cellulitis pathology
Diagnosis and testing, Inflammation
Diagnosis and testing
Wells syndrome pathology
Author: Dr Ben Tallon, Dermatologist/Dermatopathologist, Tauranga, New Zealand, 2011.
Differential diagnoses
Histology of Wells syndrome
Scanning power view of Wells syndrome reveals a superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial inflammatory pattern (Figures 1 and 2). This can be seen to extend into the subcutaneous tissue (Figure 3) or even the underlying muscle. The inflammatory infiltrate is comprised of lymphocytes, histiocytes and abundant eosinophils (Figures 4,5 and 6). Degranulation of the eosinophils is seen forming flame figures (Figures 4 and 5). In this particular case extensive interstitial mucin is seen (Figures 4 and 5).
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 Figure 6
Variants of Wells syndrome pathology
Bullous Wells disease: A subepidermal blister can form in the presence of prominent papillary dermal oedema.
Differential diagnosis of Wells syndrome pathology
Bullous pemphigoid: In most circumstances, it is the urticarial phase of bullous pemphigoid which may prove difficult to discriminate. Eosinophils can be seen to tag along with the dermoepidermal junction in conjunction with basal layer vacuolar degeneration
Churg Strauss syndrome: While dermal eosinophilia and flame figures can be seen, this condition is characterised by necrotising granuloma formation and variable degrees of vasculitis.
Skin Pathology (2nd edition, 2002). Weedon D
Pathology of the Skin (3rd edition, 2005). McKee PH, J. Calonje JE, Granter SR
Churg, A. Recent advances in the diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome. Mod Pathol 2001;14(12):1284–93. PubMed
Dermatopathology index
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: What Is Dermatology]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/what-is-dermatology]
What is dermatology? — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
What is dermatology?
What is dermatology? — extra information
Medicine of the skin, dermatol.
What is dermatology?
Last reviewed: May 2023
Author(s): Dr Sera Sarsam, Medical Officer, Royal Melbourne Hospital; Dr Neda So, Dermatology Registrar, Melbourne; and Dr Michelle Rodrigues, Dermatologist, Chroma Dermatology, Australia (2023)Previous contributors: Dr Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (1997)
Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Most common skin disorders
Dermatological examinations and procedures
Dermatology is the medical discipline that is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the skin, hair, and nails in both children and adults. Specialists in dermatology are called dermatologists.
The New Zealand Dermatological Society’s definition is comprehensive:
“Dermatology involves but is not limited to study, research, and diagnosis of normal and disorders, diseases, cancers, cosmetic and ageing conditions of the skin, fat, hair, nails and oral and genital membranes, and the management of these by different investigations and therapies, including but not limited to dermatohistopathology, topical and systemic medications, dermatologic surgery and dermatologic cosmetic surgery, immunotherapy, phototherapy, laser therapy, radiotherapy and photodynamic therapy.”
How many people get skin disease?
The skin is the largest and most visible organ of the body. It reflects the health of the body and acts as a barrier against injury and bacteria.
Skin disorders are the fourth most frequent cause of all human disease, affecting between 30–70% of people worldwide. Most people develop some type of skin disease during their life, from infants to the elderly, and this is one of the leading reasons to seek medical advice in all societies.
What are the different fields of dermatology?
There are many fields and subspecialties within dermatology, including (but not limited to):
Medical dermatology – includes dealing with medical conditions such as dermatitis, psoriasis, urticaria, connective tissue diseases, skin infections, disorders of pigmentation, skin conditions associated with internal diseases, and acne and rosacea in both adults and children (paediatric dermatology).
Surgical dermatology – deals mostly with treating and removing skin lesions such as melanoma, non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), and other non-cancerous lesions by a variety of modalities including curettage and cautery, cryotherapy, excisional surgery and photodynamic therapy. This field also includes Mohs micrographic surgery.
Cosmetic dermatology – focusing on the cosmetic treatment of skin, hair, and nail conditions. This includes laser treatments, removal of scars, hair implants, injectable fillers, and botulinum toxin (Botox).
What are the most common skin disorders?
Common skin diseases include:
Skin infections: fungal, viral (eg, herpes simplex), and bacterial
Dermatitis — one in six children develop atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Acne — a common condition affecting adolescents worldwide
Alopecia (hair loss) – autoimmune disease that affects 2% of people worldwide.
Dermatological examinations and procedures
See Dermatological investigations and tests for more detail.
A dermatoscope is a handheld medical device that employs a magnification illuminated lens system that assists in the identification and diagnosis of skin lesions.
Microbiology samples
A swab can be taken from skin lesions with exudate or fluid to be examined for viral and bacterial cultures.
A sample of scaly skin can be taken by scraping a disposable scalpel blade 90 degrees to the skin to collect surface dead skin cells for fungal examination.
This includes removal of a skin sample from the lesion of interest to be sent for histopathological examination. It is performed under local anaesthesia. There are different methods for taking a skin biopsy – including a shave biopsy, punch biopsy, or excision biopsy. It is useful in diagnosing many skin diseases including skin cancers and blistering skin conditions.
Intralesional steroid injection
The injection of steroids into the skin is used in the management of different conditions such as hypertrophic or keloid scars, acne cysts, vitiligo, and alopecia.
This includes using narrow band ultraviolet (UV) radiation in treating various skin conditions such as eczema (atopic dermatitis), psoriasis, vitiligo, and pruritus.
Research in dermatology
Research is an important component of dermatology, leading to many advances in the field and improved patient outcomes. Many dermatologists are involved in research, at both basic science and clinical levels.
Flohr C, Hay R. Putting the burden of skin diseases on the global map. Br J Dermatol. 2021;184 Supp 2:189-90. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19704. Journal
New Zealand Dermatological Society Inc. What is a Dermatologist? What is Dermatology? 2021. Accessed 2023. Available here
Richard MA, Paul C, Nijsten T, et al. Prevalence of most common skin diseases in Europe: a population‐based study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022;36(7):1088-96. doi: 10.1111/jdv.18050. Journal
What is a dermatologist?
Terminology in dermatology
Dermatological investigations and tests
The role of surgery in dermatology
Forensic dermatology
Worldwide dermatology links for doctors
Medical journals for the dermatologist
Worldwide dermatology societies
Dermatology conferences
Worldwide dermatology links for patients
Dermatology basics: the fundamentals of diagnosis and history taking — DermNet e-lecture [YouTube]
New Zealand Dermatological Society Inc.
The Australasian College of Dermatologists
American Academy of Dermatology Association
The British Association of Dermatologists
Gawkrodger D, Ardern-Jones MR. Dermatology: An Illustrated Colour Text. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: White Nail]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/white-nail]
White nail - Leukonychia: An overview — DermNet
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
White nail — extra information
Systemic diseases, Terminology
L60, Q84.4, L60.9, L62
111202002, 247508004, 247510002, 73751008, 403297002, 763792009, 50458000, 74102009, 47139007, 403302004, 403304003
Author(s): Linda Mardiros, University of Ottawa, Canada; Hana Numan, Senior Medical Writer, DermNet (2022)Previous contributors: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist (2016)Reviewing dermatologist: Dr Ian Coulson
Edited by the DermNet content department
Variation in skin types
Differential diagnoses
What are white nails?
A white nail, also known as leukonychia, is the partial or full discolouration of the nail plate on one or more fingernails or toenails.
White nails are the most common nail dyschromia. The nail will lose its general pink undertone and appear white.
Punctate leukonychia Parallel bands of leukonychia due to cyclical chemotherapy Congenital leukonychia (L-patient3)'Half and half nail': leukonychia is affecting the proximal half of the nail (L-patient2)Congenital leukonychia (L-patient3)Leukonychia due to hypoalbuminaemia (L-patient5)
How is a white nail classified?
Leukonychia can be classified by underlying pathology, its distribution, or how it develops.
Classification according to pathology
Leukonychia can be subdivided into true and apparent discolouration.
True leukonychia: discolouration due to abnormal nail plate keratinisation. The white nail will not be hidden by pressure application of the nail plate to the bed.
Apparent leukonychia: secondary to disease of the nail bed. This appearance disappears with pressure application on the nail.
Classification according to distribution
Leukonychia can be partial or total.
Total leukonychia: whitening of the entire nail plate.
Partial leukonychia: 3 subtypes are described.
Striate (see below).
Classification by development timeline
White nails can be acquired or congenital.
Congenital: familial leukonychia is more commonly inherited recessively, although dominant patterns are possible. This is due to a mutation in the phospholipase C delta-1 gene in which all nails appear milky and porcelain white.
Acquired: secondary to systemic disease. Important to note that congenital leukonychia may also be secondary to systemic disease (see below).
Who gets a white nail?
White nails can affect anyone of any gender, age or ethnicity. Its presence may warrant a work-up for systemic disease.
What causes a white nail?
True leukonychia: partial or whole nail plate damage caused by injury to the nail plate or matrix. Keratin disruption with trapped air within the nail plate, resulting in reflection and lack of transparency.
Punctate leukonychia: occurs after nail biting, manicuring, knocks and bangs, and tight footwear use.
Striate leukonychia: also known as Mees lines or transverse leukonychia, may follow damage to the nail matrix; furrows and ridges may also appear.
Total leukonychia: can follow a more serious injury, often with detachment of the nail plate from the nail bed, and alteration to the nail contour.
Mees line, Lindsay nails, Muehrcke lines (see below), and punctate leukonychia may be associated with:
Heavy metal poisoning (eg lead, arsenic)
There are three distinct types of apparent leukonychia that may be associated with the systemic disease:
Muehrcke lines: A pair of observable, non-palpable, horizontal (transverse) white lines across the nail due to variable blood flow
Lindsay nails (half-and-half nails): Proximally white or pink-coloured nail with a distal darkening
Terry nails: Whitening of the majority of the nail with a thin 0.5-3.0 mm distal darkening.
Terry nails have been associated with:
Chronic kidney disease
Hypoalbuminemia (due to protein malabsorption, eg, in colitis)
Protein-losing enteropathy
Iron deficiency (anaemia)
Lindsay nails have been associated with:
Chronic kidney disease
Muehrcke lines have been associated with:
What are the clinical features of a white nail?
True leukonychia with partial distribution:
Punctate leukonychia:
Most common form of true leukonychia
Described as small white spots on the nails
Tends to be the result of trauma and isolated to a few nails.
Longitudinal leukonychia:
Small white longitudinal bands
Presenting in individuals with Darier disease or Hailey-Hailey disease.
Striate or transverse leukonychia (Mees line):
One or more white horizontal bands across the entire nail in parallel with the lunula.
Patients with multiple true leukonychia warrant a thorough history, physical examination, and medication review to exclude a toxic or systemic etiology. This is also true of leukonychia extending the full width of the nail plate.
How do clinical features vary in differing types of skin?
They appear similar in different skin types.
What are the complications of a white nail?
White nails are a cosmetic nuisance but may be a marker of an underlying systemic disease, but per se do not have any physical complications.
How is a white nail diagnosed?
A thorough history and physical examination may be sufficient for diagnosis. Although, when the cause is unclear, the following tests may be helpful:
Nail clippings to exclude fungal infection
Blood tests to evaluate systemic disease, particularly renal and liver function tests.
What is the differential diagnosis for a white nail?
Onychomycosis (also known as pseudoleukonychia) — the disease of the nail plate is due to external factors
Trachyonychia (twenty-nail dystrophy)
Vitiligo of the nail.
White discolouration of the distal nail plate in superficial white onychomycosis (ONYC-patient1)Nail psoriasis
What is the treatment for a white nail?
Treatment ultimately depends on the presence of any underlying cause.
There is no treatment for trauma-related leukonychia. Punctate lesions will disappear as the nail follows its natural growth pattern (around 6 to 9 months for a fingernail).
How do you prevent a white nail?
Avoidance of trauma-induced leukonychia will help prevent development of white nails.
Avoiding excessive use of nail polish or excessive mechanical force with false nail application/removal.
Minimising picking and biting nails.
Wearing appropriate shoes to prevent excessive pressure on toes.
Applying moisturisers to hydrate nails.
What is the outcome for a white nail?
Iorizzo M, Starace M, Pasch MC. Leukonychia: What Can White Nails Tell Us?. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(2):177–93. doi:10.1007/s40257-022-00671-6. Journal
Pitukweerakul S, Pilla S. Terry's Nails and Lindsay's Nails: Two Nail Abnormalities in Chronic Systemic Diseases. J Gen Intern Med. 2016;31(8):970. doi:10.1007/s11606-016-3628-z. Journal
Richert B, Caucanas M, André J. Diagnosis using nail matrix. Dermatol Clin. 2015;33(2):243–55. doi:10.1016/j.det.2014.12.005. Journal
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Winter Itch]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/winter-itch]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Winter itch — extra information
Author: Dr Varitsara Mangkorntongsakul, Junior Medical Officer, Central Coast Local Health District, Gosford/Hamlyn Terrace, NSW, Australia. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. August 2018.
What is winter itch?
Winter itch, also known as pruritus hiemalis, is a type of subclinical dermatitis, that affects individuals during cold weather.
Clinical signs of winter itch
Apparently normal skin Excoriations Dermatitis
Who gets winter itch?
Winter itch can affect the healthy population of all ages, but has a higher prevalence in older people with dry skin.
It is uncommon in children and adolescents.
It affects men and women equally.
It is not influenced by socioeconomic status or personal hygiene.
What causes winter itch?
The exact cause of winter itch is unknown. Factors associated with winter itch include:
Itching associated with cold weather, often coexisting with dry skin
Itch presenting in autumn and winter, and clearing up during the summer months
The aggravation of symptoms by the wearing of certain types of textures, such as flannel or woollen wear.
Similar symptoms have also been reported in patients exposed to refrigerated air conditioning during the summer months. Winter itch is not influenced by frequency of bathing or by the temperature of the bath water.
What are the clinical features of winter itch?
Winter itch does not cause a primary visible rash. The affected skin generally appears healthy, but usually slightly dry.
The itch affects most or all parts of the body, but most commonly occurs on the legs.
Typical sites are the inner surface of the thighs, above and behind the knees, on the calves, and around the ankles.
It does not affect the hands, feet, face or scalp.
The degree of irritation varies from mild to severe; when severe, it can result in great distress and discomfort, that may require medical attention.
The itchiness is sudden in onset, and is generally most noticeable at night and when removing clothing.
Secondary lesions arise as a consequence of chronic scratching.
The skin becomes erythematous with noticeable scratch marks.
Scratched skin may be dry, rough and thickened (lichenified).
Intense rubbing of the skin may cause desquamation.
There may be a secondary folliculitis, with torn and broken hair shafts due to constant scratching.
How is winter itch diagnosed?
Winter itch can be associated and confused with other diseases that cause itchiness, particularly dermatitis (where there is a visible rash), and pruritus associated with systemic diseases (which tends to be generalised).
Detailed history taking and careful examination are important to rule out other potential causes of pruritus.
What is the treatment for winter itch?
Treatment is mainly to provide symptomatic relief and prevent scratching.
Bathe in warm water prior to sleep. Some people report a benefit from the addition of sodium bicarbonate to the water (a quarter of a cup of baking soda swished around in a full bath).
Emollients are the mainstay of treatment. Apply a moisturising cream after bathing and whenever the skin feels itchy or dry.
Wear lightweight clothing such as silk, linen, and muslin.
Avoid irritating fabrics, such as woollen clothing.
Use topical corticosteroids to treat secondary dermatitis and lichen simplex.
Capsaicin cream can be useful for localised areas of persistent itch.
Systemic agents are not indicated for winter itch, but oral antihistamines and systemic corticosteroids are sometimes prescribed as a clinical trial.
What is the outcome for winter itch?
Winter itch normally resolves after the winter months.
The duration of itching varies among individuals. It may last for a few days or weeks, and occasionally throughout the winter.
Winter itch may recur throughout a person’s lifetime or disappear permanently at the end of the first attack.
Duhring LA. Pruritus hiemalis: An undescribed form of pruritus. A practical treatise on diseases of the skin. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott & Co, 1874: 3–20.
Handfield-Jones S. Itching. Medicine 2009; 37: 273–6. DOI: 10.1016/j.mpmed.2009.02.007. Journal
Yosipovitch G, Hundley JL. Practical guidelines for the relief of itch. Dermatol Nurs 2004; 16; 325–8. Available from:
Chernosky ME. Pruritic skin disease and summer air conditioning. JAMA 1962; 179: 1005–10. DOI: 10.1001/jama.1962.03050130009003. Journal
Rashes affecting the lower legs
Reactions to external agents
Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome
Differential diagnosis of very itchy skin
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wood Lamp Skin Examination]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wood-lamp-skin-examination]
Wood lamp skin examination
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Wood lamp skin examination
Wood lamp skin examination — extra information
Wood light examination
Diagnosis and testing
73874002, 15340005, 50387000
Diagnosis and testing
Wood lamp skin examination
Author: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. August 2014.
Introduction - Wood lamp
Introduction - fluorescence
What is Wood lamp skin examination?
Wood lamp examination is a diagnostic test in which the skin or hair is examined while exposed to the black light emitted by Wood lamp. Blacklight is invisible to the naked eye because it is in the ultraviolet spectrum, with a wavelength just shorter than the colour violet. The lamp glows violet in a dark environment because it also emits some light in the violet part of the electromagnetic spectrum.
What is a Wood lamp?
A traditional Wood lamp is a low-output mercury arc covered by a Wood filter (barium silicate and 9% nickel oxide) and emits wavelength 320–450 nm (peak 365 nm). The lamp was invented in 1903 by a Baltimore physicist, Robert W. Wood.
Modern black light sources may be specially designed BLB fluorescent lamps, mercury vapour lamps, light-emitting diodes, or incandescent lamps. Fluorescent black light tubes have a dark blue filter coating on the tube, which filters out most visible light. There are several models with varying properties. The medical Wood lamp may include:
A variety phosphors with different peak emission
Black drape to exclude light
Describe a Wood lamp skin examination
Examination using Wood lamp involves the following steps.
Ideally, skin to be examined should not have been recently washed or had any makeup, deodorant or moisturising cream applied, as these can fluorescence causing a false positive result
Gentle facial skin cleansing may be required
Room lights are turned off, and window shades are drawn, or black drape used to darken the surroundings completely
A Wood lamp is used to identify the extent of pigmented or depigmented patches and to detect fluorescence. Normal healthy skin is slightly blue but shows white spots where there is thickened skin, yellow where it is oily, and purple spots where it is dehydrated. Clothing lint often shines bright white.
A positive result is reported if a pigmentary disorder is more noticeable when examined using the Wood lamp or if fluorescence is noted.
Burton Wood lamp Wood lamp Wood lamp examination
What is fluorescence?
Fluorescence is a coloured glow seen when certain substances such as collagen and porphyrins absorb black light and emit it again at a longer wavelength in the visible spectrum. Items on the skin surface such as fabric, topical medications and soap residue can also fluoresce.
What conditions are diagnosed using a Wood lamp?
A Wood lamp for skin examination may reveal:
Increase in pigmentation (eg, melasma, postinflammatory pigmentation) to determine whether the pigmentation is epidermal (pigmentation enhanced by Wood lamp examination) or dermal (pigmentation unchanged by Wood lamp examination). Pigmented lesions have a clear border under Wood light because the light is absorbed by increased melanin
Loss of pigmentation (eg, vitiligo) or reduced pigmentation (eg, ash-leaf macules in tuberous sclerosis and hypomelanosis of Ito) to identify affected areas in light-skinned people. Hypopigmented skin has sharper borders under black light and fluoresces bright blue-white (or sometimes, yellowish green) due to accumulated biopterins. In contrast, areas of reduced blood flow are unchanged
Pityriasis versicolor—a slightly scaly persistent rash on anterior chest and back caused by Malassezia yeasts. When active, the scale emits a yellowish or orange glow
Malassezia folliculitis—hair follicles fluoresce bluish-white
Tinea capitis—areas of scale and baldness due to fungal infection. Microsporum species fluoresce blue-green (M canis, M audouinii, M ferrugineum, M distortum); Trichophyton schoenleinii fluoresces dull blue. Fungal infection due to other organisms does not fluoresce
Head lice and scabies
Erythrasma—corynebacteria bacteria cause a pigmented rash in skin folds that fluoresces a coral-pink colour
Pseudomonas in spa pool folliculitis and wound infection fluoresces green
Acne fluoresces orange-red due to cutibacteria in hair follicles
Porphyria causes red-pink fluorescence of the skin (porphyria cutanea tarda), or teeth (erythropoetic porphyria)
Porphyrins used as the photosensitiser in photodynamic therapy
Drugs on the skin surface—tetracyclines and mepacrine fluoresce after oral ingestion
The evenness of application of a salicylic acid-containing chemical peel (this fluoresces green).
Fluorescence noted during Wood lamp examination
Coral-pink fluorescence in erythrasma using Wood lamp Fluorescence in tinea capitis using Wood lamp
Other uses for Wood lamp
Apart from Wood lamp skin examination, the Wood lamp has other uses.
Biochemistry laboratory may look for signs of porphyria in red blood cells (erythropoietic protoporphyria), urine and stool (porphyria cutanea tarda)
Molecular biology laboratory may use a Wood lamp to detect compounds with a fluorescent tag
Aestheticians check for signs of ageing skin and other imperfections
Ophthalmologists look for scratches and foreign bodies in the cornea of the eye
Veterinary surgeons use the Wood lamp when examining pets for bacterial, fungal, or parasitic infection
Law enforcement officers examine crime scenes and clothing for semen and urine
Pet or rodent urine/faeces is easily detected using a Wood lamp
Metal fatigue can be evaluated using a fluorescent fluid and Wood lamp examination
Nightclubs use a Wood lamp to check fluorescent re-entry stamps
Immigration officers check that passports are genuine
Banks check for counterfeit money
Mineralogy and gemology
Displaying fluorescent paint used in art and sculpture
Does the Wood lamp cause any harm?
The black light emitted by a Wood lamp is harmless. The lamp does not emit short-wavelength ultraviolet B radiation (290–320 nm), so it does not cause sunburn or otherwise damage healthy skin.
It is possible that a patient with extreme photosensitivity might develop a rash on skin exposed to black light. However, Wood lamp examination is usually very brief and unlikely to cause problems even in very photosensitive patients.
It is prudent to ask the patient to close their eyes when examining the face.
Wood's Lamp Examination — Georgia Department of Juvenile Justice
Gupta LK, Singhi M K. Wood's lamp. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol [serial online] 2004 [cited 2014 Aug 8];70:131–5. Journal
Wood's lamp examination — MedlinePlus
Black light — Wikipedia
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wound Cleansers]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wound-cleansers]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Wound cleansers — extra information
Rinsing solutions for wounds
225150002, 292863008, 373222005, 2869004, 373568007, 386989006, 387171003, 71374001, 430477008
Author: Dr Varitsara Mangkorntongsakul, Junior Medical Officer, Central Coast Local Health District, Gosford/Hamlyn Terrace, NSW, Australia. DermNet Editor in Chief: Adjunct A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell/Maria McGivern. June 2019.
Therapeutic indications
What are wound cleansers?
Wound cleansers are rinsing solutions used to remove foreign materials on a wound surface and its surrounding skin.
Wound cleansers are a cost-effective means to promote wound healing and reduce the infection rate. However, routine cleansing may also remove products and tissues that are essential for wound healing, such as regenerating epithelium, growth factors, and chemokines.
Tap water Normal saline Chlorhexidine solution
What is the therapeutic indication for a wound cleanser?
A cleanser should be used as the first step in every acute or chronic wound bed preparation. The cleansers are intended to remove foreign bodies and reduce the risk of infection.
What should be considered when choosing a wound cleanser?
In clinical practice, the decision on which cleansing agent to use has been largely based on local guidelines and personal preference.
An ideal wound-cleansing solution would:
Not induce an immune response (be biocompatible)
Reduce the numbers of pathogenic bacteria
Not induce bacterial resistance (see methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA])
Be easily accessible
Be stable with a long shelf life.
Types of wound cleansers
Wound cleansers include water, saline, and antimicrobial agents. Dyes and organic mercury compounds are considered obsolete.
Drinking water has an excellent safety profile.
It is efficient, cost-effective, and easily accessible.
Drinking water is an acceptable alternative when sterile water and normal saline are not available.
The rate of wound infection when tap water is used is similar to that with normal saline.
Tap water is a possible infection risk and should be avoided in a deep wound, especially when there is an exposure of bone or tendon.
The solution is not isotonic.
Sterile water is an option when normal saline is contraindicated or not available.
Sterile water does not induce fever and has no antimicrobial properties.
The unused contents of opened containers should be discarded.
It is a non-buffered hypotonic solution with an osmolarity (concentration of solute particles per litre in a solution) of 0 osmol/L; this may result in cellular oedema and rupture.
Prolonged soaking in water can result in increased wound exudate, requiring frequent dressing changes.
Sterile water does not promote wound healing in the presence of a pathogenic biofilm.
Irrigation with sterile water can be painful; analgesia may be required.
Normal saline (0.9% NaCl)
Normal saline is an isotonic solution that does not interfere with normal wound repair.
It has low toxicity compared to other wound-cleansing solutions.
It does not cause an allergic reaction or change the normal flora of the skin.
Normal saline has a similar wound infection rate to drinkable tap water.
Normal saline does not cleanse dirty or necrotic wounds effectively.
It has no antimicrobial properties.
The unused contents of opened containers should be discarded.
Antimicrobial wound cleansers
Older guidelines have discouraged the use of conventional antiseptic solutions as these impair wound healing, reduce wound strength, and increase the rate of infection.
In contrast, newer broad-spectrum antimicrobial cleansing products can reduce microorganism colonisation and infection rates, and some of them promote wound healing. They can be used in acute and chronic wounds, deep wounds, or superficial wounds.
Acetic acid (vinegar) is inexpensive and readily available.
It is effective against Staphylococcus aureus, MRSA, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and other Gram-negative bacteria.
It promotes wound healing.
Acetic acid may sting on application if the solution is > 2% acetic acid in water (neat vinegar is typically 5-8% acetic acid).
Chlorhexidine (0.05%)
Chlorhexidine is a broad-spectrum antibacterial solution.
It prevents the penetration and systematic spreading of bacteria, including MRSA (excluding any deep muscle invasion).
Chlorhexidine can cause skin irritation.
When used as a mouthwash, it can cause teeth discolouration.
Application around the eyes may cause conjunctivitis and corneal ulcers.
It does not affect mycobacteria, bacterial spores and certain viruses, including polioviruses and adenoviruses.
Chlorhexidine is pH-dependent.
Body fluids and tap water may inactivate its antibacterial properties.
Povidone iodine (PVP-I), a stable chemical complex of polyvinylpyrrolidone and iodine, is useful for acute open wounds such as human or animal bites, stabs/punctures, and gunshot wounds.
It is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial solution that provides limited coverage for many types of pathogens (eg, S. aureus, dermatophytes, yeasts, and viruses).
Some studies have demonstrated a reduced infection rate in surgical wounds with the use of PVP-I.
It may be useful in treating excessive granulation tissue.
Povidone iodine is a cytotoxic agent that can delay wound healing.
It can cause irritation, dryness, and discolouration.
It is a sensitiser and has adverse effects on the thyroid gland.
Povidone is not suitable for chronic wounds. Do not use it for more than 7 days.
Hydrogen peroxide (H202) is now rarely used as a wound cleanser.
When used at full strength, hydrogen peroxide may act as a chemical debriding agent that effectively removes debris and necrotic tissues from the wound surface.
Irrigation with normal saline is recommended after full-strength hydrogen peroxide is used.
It should be avoided in wounds around the sinus tracts.
Sodium hypochlorite 0.4–0.5% (Dakin solution)
Diluted bleach has bactericidal properties including on biofilm.
Sodium hypochlorite 0.4–0.5% (Dakin solution) is indicated in pressure ulcers with necrotic wounds to help reduce and control infection.
It can be used to wash out deep wounds and cavities.
It has been used over cancerous growths to control infection.
Superoxidised solution
Superoxidised solution is also known as superoxidised water, anolyte solution, electrolysed water, and oxidative potential water. It is an electrochemically processed solution made from water and sodium chloride (salt), resulting in a pH neutral combination of hypochlorous acid and sodium hypochlorite.
Superoxidised solution can be used in all types of wounds.
It reduces [bacterial colonisation]([sitetree_link,id=Loading, please wait...]>), biofilm, and inflammation.
It enhances wound healing.
It is non-toxic, non-sensitising, and non-irritating.
Octenidine solution is used for superficial skin wounds and should be avoided in wounds near the sinus tracts.
Octenidine is effective against P. aeruginosa and S. aureus biofilm.
It can be used for the decolonisation of multidrug-resistant organisms.
It promotes wound healing and is non-sensitising.
Polyhexamethylene biguanide/polyhexanide
Polyhexethylene biguanide (PHMB), also known as polyhexanide, is the antiseptic of choice for colonised and infected chronic wounds and burns.
It is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial that is effective against a variety of pathogens, including MRSA, P. aeruginosa and other bacteria.
Studies have shown that it accelerates wound healing and decreases the bacterial count.
It does not cause antimicrobial resistance.
PHMB has good clinical safety and is well tolerated with minimal toxicity.
PHMB combined with undecylenamidopropyl betaine
Undecylenamidopropyl betaine is a surfactant (detergent) that effectively removes biofilm and debris and prevents recontamination.
The combination of PHMB and betaine enhances the antimicrobial effect and reduces cytotoxicity.
This combination has been clinically proven to be more effective in the removal of biofilm, debris, slough, and bioburden in wounds compared to normal saline.
It is suitable for long-term use on thermal burns, as it is not absorbed by the cells.
It provides an optimal environment for wound repair.
Unlike other antiseptics, it does not inhibit the formation of granulation tissue.
It has been shown to reduce the duration of healing, infection, and inflammation.
It promotes healing in venous leg ulcers and pressure ulcers.
It provides odour control.
PHMB and betaine may irritate in long-term use.
Ovens L, Irving S. Advances in wound cleansing: an integrated approach. Wounds UK 2018; 14(1): 58–63. Journal
Collier M, Hofer P. Taking wound cleansing seriously to minimize risk. Wounds UK 2017; 13(1): 58–64. Journal
Gabriel A. Wound irrigation. Medscape. Updated 14 December 2017. Available from: [accessed April 27 2018]
Queirós P, Santos E, Apóstolo J, Cardoso D, Cunha M, Rodrigues M. The effectiveness of cleansing solutions for wound treatment: a systematic review protocol. JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports 2013; 11(5): 169–181. Journal
Lindfors J. A comparison of an antimicrobial wound cleanser to normal saline in reduction of bioburden and its effect on wound healing. Ostomy Wound Manage 2004; 50(8): 28–41. PubMed
Wound Healing and Management Node Group. Evidence summary: Wound management – chlorhexidine. Journal of the Australian Wound Management Association 2017; 25: 49–51. Journal
Cornish L, Douglas H. Cleansing of acute traumatic wounds: tap water or normal saline. Wounds UK 2016; 12(4): 30–35. Journal
Gannon R. Fact file: Wound cleansing: sterile water or saline? Nursing Times. 27 February 2007. Available at: [accessed April 2018]
Kramer A, Dissemond J, Kim S, et al. Consensus on wound antisepsis: update 2018. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2018; 31: 28–58. DOI: 10.1159/000481545. PubMed
Fernandez R, Griffiths R. Water for wound cleansing. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; (2): CD003861. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003861.pub3. Journal
Negative pressure wound therapy
Synthetic wound dressings
Keratin-based dressings for chronic wounds
Topical silver therapy
Superoxidised solution
New Zealand Wound Care Society
What dressing for what wound — Prue Lennox, National Clinical Leader, Healthcare Rehabilitation Ltd and Vice President, NZ Wound Care Society (pdf of presentation).
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wound Closure]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wound-closure]
Wound closure techniques
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Surgical wound closure
Surgical wound closure — extra information
746011009, 427546003, 405042003, 261232006, 80335005, 698983008, 304103008, 304088000, 304099003, 303249004, 265675003, 783539008, 782830007
Surgical wound closure
Author: Dr Tom Middelburg MD PhD, Dermatologist, Canterbury District Health Board, New Zealand, January (2017)
The aims of wound closure
Surgical wounds can be left to heal by themselves (secondary intention healing), or they can be closed surgically. Secondary intention can take weeks to months depending on the size and location. Ultimately a relatively broad contracted scar is formed. Secondary intention healing may, however, be preferred over surgical closure in the following situations:
Contaminated wounds, as the risk of an infection is higher when these wounds are sutured
Wounds in concave sites such as parts of the ear or medial canthus
If surgical reconstruction requires a larger reconstruction than desired or if the patient is unfit for such surgery
Reasons to choose a surgical type of wound closure instead can be to:
Speed up the wound closure
Protect underlying tissues (eg, bone, cartilage, nerve)
Improve function by choosing the direction of skin tension on the wound edges (eg, avoiding ectropion)
Improve cosmesis by hiding the scar on borders of cosmetic (sub) units as much as possible
Surgical techniques to close a wound include:
Primary closure refers to direct apposition of wound edges. See schematic diagram of primary closure design.
The edges of the wound may be undermined to free up the wound edges and reduce tension.
Sutures are then placed to close the wound.
It is often preferable to place two layers of sutures: one layer of dissolving sutures buried in the dermis or deeper tissue layers, followed by either dissolving or non-dissolving sutures under minimal tension to neatly oppose the epidermis.
For high tension wounds or wounds on fragile skin, special suture techniques may be used to spread tension along the wound edge.
Skin flap refers to a procedure where tissue is moved or lifted from a donor site to cover the recipient site (the wound) while leaving the blood supply intact. For each type of flap, a basic diagram explaining the design is included.
An incision from the wound edge towards the side of the wound is made. The area of adjacent skin is undermined and advanced laterally to approximate wound edges. Excess skin at the end of the incision needs to be addressed by excising it ("dog-ear correction"), as shown in the drawing, or with a Z-plasty.
A semicircular incision is made starting at the wound edge. The area of adjacent skin is undermined and advanced towards the wound edges by rotating it. Similar to the advancement flap, it is usually required to adjust for excess skin at the end of the incision. Rotation and advancement flaps are similar in design and often overlap.
Also referred to as a V-Y flap. A V-shaped incision is made, after which the area underneath this is undermined leaving a subcutaneous pedicle intact for blood supply. This results in a piece of pedicled skin (the island) that can be freely moved toward the wound edge, creating a Y-shaped scar.
This type of flap involves lifting tissue into the defect over the top of the intact surrounding skin. One of the basic types of transposition flaps is a rhomboid flap, the design of which is shown in the schematic drawing. When the donor site is too far away from the recipient site (the wound), a vascular pedicle can be left intact that is also transposed over or under an area of normal skin forming a bridge or tunnel. This is called an interpolation flap. The pedicle is divided at a later stage when new blood supply at the donor site has been formed. Common examples of this type of flap are the paramedian forehead, melolebial and retroauricular flaps.
Tissue from a distant site is cut loose from the donor site and reattached to the vasculature of the recipient site.
A skin graft refers to a procedure where the skin is completely excised from another site and sewn into the defect to patch the wound. The graft is dependent on local oxygen supply at the donor site and therefore requires a well-vascularised wound bed. There are different types of skin grafts.
Full-thickness skin graft. A piece of skin is excised down to the level of fat and therefore includes epidermis and the full thickness of the dermis and adnexal structures such as hair follicles.
Split-thickness skin graft. Skin is excised to the level of superficial to the mid dermis.
Composite graft. Contains full-thickness skin and underlying tissue (eg, muscle, fascia, cartilage).
Baker SR. Local Flaps in Facial Reconstruction, 3rd edition, 2014.
Robinson JK, Hanke CW, Siegel DM et al. Surgery of the skin — Procedural Dermatology, 3rd edition, 2015.
Risks and complications of skin surgery
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver

---

[DISEASE: Wound Infections]
[CATEGORY: skin_disease]
[TYPE: dermnet_skin]
[LANGUAGE: en]
[SOURCE: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/wound-infections]
Are you a healthcare professional
Common skin conditions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Try our skin symptom checker
Wound infection — extra information
Surgical site infection
T81.41, T81.42, T81.43, T81.49
81.2Y, 81.22, NE81.2Z, NE81.20, NE81.21, MC65
76844004, 433202001, 58126003, 213286009, 213283000, 225550006, 609341000, 609340004, 609339001, 298010008, 225150002, 422181004, 391158008, 239163008, 298012000
Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2005.
What is a wound infection?
Wound infection is defined by the US Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as surgical site infection (SSI). This is further defined as:
Superficial incisional SSI – infection involves only skin and subcutaneous tissue of incision.
Deep incisional SSI — infection involves deep tissues, such as facial and muscle layers.
Organ/space SSI — infection involves any part of the anatomy in organs and spaces other than the incision, which was opened or manipulated during the operation.
Although this definition of wound infection is restricted to those arising from a surgical incision, a broader and more general definition would be an infection of a wound caused by physical injury of the skin as a result of penetrating trauma from plants, animals, guns, knives or other objects. Wounds break the continuity of the skin and allow organisms to gain access to tissues and cause infection.
Infections arising in surgical wounds are one of the most common hospital-acquired infections and are an important cause of morbidity and mortality. Hence, the focus of this article is on the recognition and management of surgical wound infections.
What defines a surgical wound infection?
A surgical wound/site infection is defined by the following criteria. Infection must occur within 30 days of the surgical operation, and at least one of the following must occur:
Purulent discharge from the surgical site
Purulent discharge from wound or drain placed in the wound
Organisms isolated from the aseptically obtained wound culture
Must be at least one of the signs and symptoms of infection — pain or tenderness, localised swelling, or redness/heat.
Other signs of wound infection include:
Delayed healing not previously anticipated.
Discolouration of tissues both within and at the wound margins.
Abnormal smell coming from the wound site.
Friable, bleeding granulation tissue despite appropriate care and management.
Lymphangitis, a red line originating from the wound and leading to swollen tender lymph glands draining the affected area.
Surgical site infections do not include a stitch abscess, episiotomy infection, newborn circumcision scar, or infected thermal burn wound.
After cryotherapy After curettage After excision Lymphangitis following accidental wound. Image supplied by Dr T Evans.
What causes a wound infection?
Wound infections are caused by the deposition and multiplication of microorganisms in the surgical site of a susceptible host. There are a number of ways microorganisms can get into wounds.
Airborne dispersal – surrounding air contaminated with micro-organisms that deposit onto the wound
Self-contamination – physical migration of the patient’s own endogenous flora which is present on the skin, mucous membranes or gastrointestinal tract to the surgical site.
The most common causative organisms associated with wound infections include Staphylococcus aureus/MRSA, Streptococcus pyogenes, Enterococci and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Contributing factors
General patient characteristics
Age, obesity, malnutrition
Endocrine and metabolic disorders
Wound characteristics
Nonviable tissue in the wound
Haematoma formation.
Operative characteristics
Poor surgical technique
Long operation time (> 2 hours)
Intraoperative contamination
Prolonged preoperative stay
What is the risk of wound infection?
The risk of wound infection varies with the type of surgery. Certain types of surgery carry a higher risk of contamination than others and have led to the following classification of surgical wounds.
Clean wound, for example, hernia repair
Uninfected operative wound
No acute inflammation
No entry to internal organs
No break in aseptic technique
Clean-contaminated wound, for example, an appendicectomy
Opening to internal organ but minimal or no spillage of contents
No evidence of infection or major break in aseptic technique
Contaminated wound, for example, colectomy due to obstruction
Opening to internal organs with inflammation or spillage of contents
A major break in aseptic technique
Purulent inflammation
Intraperitoneal abscess formation or visceral perforation
How are wound infections prevented?
The goal of wound infection management is to prevent or minimise the risk of infection. The following factors or methods external to the patient are used to prevent infection.
Theatre environment and care of instruments
Maintain positive pressure ventilation of operating theatre
Laminar airflow in high-risk areas
Sterilisation of surgical instruments, sutures etc according to guidelines
Surgical team members educated in aseptic technique
Staff with infections excluded from duty
Scrubbing up followed by appropriate sterile attire
Techniques applied to the patient to prevent wound infections include:
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Good surgical technique.
Antiseptic wound cleansers are adequate for clean wounds or lightly contaminated wounds. Antibiotic prophylaxis may be indicated for clean-contaminated wounds and is usually recommended for contaminated wounds. Antibiotics for dirty wounds are part of the treatment because the infection is already established. When deciding on a prophylactic antibiotic consider the following:
Use an antibiotic based on likely bacteria to cause infection
An antibiotic should have good tissue penetration to reach wound involved
Timing and duration of antibiotic – it is important that therapeutic concentrations are reached at the time of the incision, throughout the surgical procedure and ideally a few hours postoperatively.
Wound infections — emedicine dermatology, the online textbook
Synthetic wound dressings
Blistering skin conditions
Bacterial skin infections
Wounds — Medline Plus
Management of wound infection — European Wound Management Association Position Document
Identifying criteria for wound infection — European Wound Management Association Position Document
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition
Other recommended articles
I am a dermatologist
Primary care physician
Other health professional
Other (not health professional)
Medical student or physician in training
Patient or caregiver